Acini di pepe  are a form of pasta. The name is Italian for "seeds of pepper". Acini is the plural of acino whose root is the Latin word acinus. In both Latin and Italian, the word means "grape" or "grape-stones", with the "stones of a grape" being the seeds of the grape. Acini di pepe then translates into "seeds of a pepper". They were and are known as a symbol of fertility, which is why they are used in Italian wedding soup. They are also sometimes referred to as pastina ; however, some pasta makers distinguish pastina as smaller than acini di pepe. The individual pieces usually resemble tiny cylinders about 1mm, or less, in each dimension.
Acini di pepe work well in soups and cold salads. Acini di pepe are often used in Italian wedding soup. Frog's eye salad is an American cold salad that combines the pasta with whipped topping, marshmallows, pineapple and mandarin oranges.
Agnolini are a type of stuffed egg pasta originating from the province of Mantua  and are oftentimes eaten in soup 
The recipe for Agnolotti was first published in 1662 by Bartolomeo Stefani, a cook at the court of the Gonzaga family, in his book  The art of cooking well.
Agnolini's recipe is passed down from generation to generation by Mantuan families.
Agnolini are the main ingredient of soups of the Mantuan cuisine, usually consumed during holidays and important occasions.
According to Mantuan tradition during Christmas Eve chicken broth with the Agnolini alongside other traditional Mantuan dishes such as the Agnolini's soup Sorbir d'agnoli, with abundant addition of parmesan cheese are consumed. Sorbir, to which red wine is added, generally Lambrusco, represents the opening to the Christmas lunch.Agnolini differ from the classic Emilian tortellini, to which they are similar, due to differences in the ingredients needed for the pasta dough, as well as in shape.
Anon . Istituto Carlo D'Arco per la storia di Mantova . Cucina mantovana di principi e di popolo. Testi antichi e ricette tradizionali .
Agnolotti  is a type of pasta typical of the Piedmont region of Italy, made with small pieces of flattened dough folded over a filling of roasted meat or vegetables. Agnolotti is the plural form of the Italian word agnolotto. According to a legend, the origin of the name may come from a cook called Angiolino, or "Angelot", an individual from Montferrat who is said to be the inventor of the recipe. Agnolotti can be di magro or di grasso depending on their filling of vegetables or meat.
Although their primitive shape was semi-circular, traditionally agnolotti are of a square shape with sides of about one or two inches. However, they can also be of a smaller, rectangular shape when they are called agnolotti al plin. Plin means "a pinch", because one pinches with thumb and forefinger between each mound of filling to close and seal the little pasta packets. Agnolotti al plin are almost always stuffed with meat.The dish is not to be confused with Piacenza's stuffed pasta pockets called anolini.
Agnolotti are prepared by immersion in boiling water. Typically, they are dressed with beef broth and a little melted butter or in a fresh sage and melted butter sauce, as a complex sauce would detract from the flavours in the agnolotti pockets. In both cases they may be topped with Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, but no cheese is contained within agnolotti.
One of the traditional ways to serve agnolotti del plin is to dump them onto a napkin after draining the pasta water and serve them dry with no condiment; this is reminiscent of the habit of farmers to bring food wrapped in napkins to consume during the workday.
In the Monferrato region of Italy, located within Piedmont, a special version of agnolotti is prepared with a donkey meat filling. Robiola cheese is another popular ingredient in  Piedmont.
Lang, Jenifer Harvey, ed. . "Agnolotti". Larousse Gastronomique: The New American Edition of the World's Greatest Culinary Encyclopedia. New York: Crown Publishers. ISBN 0517570327. OCLC 777810992.
Alphabet pasta, also referred to as alfabeto and alphabetti spaghetti in the UK, is a pasta that has been mechanically cut or pressed into the letters of the alphabet. It is often served in an alphabet soup, sold in a can of condensed broth. Another variation, Alphagetti, consists of letter-shaped pasta in a marinara or spaghetti sauce.
It is not clear who invented alphabet soup, when or why. As early as 1877, Paris grocers sold "...small bits of macaroni, for use in soup, which are stamped with... the letters of the alphabet." and Paris restaurants served "...delicious soups made of macaroni or vermicelli cut up into the shape of letters of the alphabet..." In 1883, The Chicago Herald Cooking School cookbook provide a recipe for soup calling for a small pasta such as "alphabet pastes of the same material as macaroni stamped in letters". In January 1900 it was on the menu at New York City's Au Lion d'Or. In 1908, Wilbur Wright was served alphabet soup in Le Mans, France.Also unclear is whether the soup or the linguistic term for an overabundance of acronyms or abbreviations came first; food historian Janet Clarkson notes that "the first reference I have found so far to the metaphorical alphabet soup also occurs in 1883, in a quotation by the originator of Life magazine, John Ames Mitchell, referring to teaching his son the alphabet soup  of business."One common American brand of condensed-style alphabet soup is the Campbell's brand. This soup, like its competitors, is marketed towards parents for its educational value.A similar product, Alphabetti Spaghetti, was sold by the H. J. Heinz Company for 60 years before being discontinued in 1990. Like Campbell's alphabet soup, it contains alphabet pasta canned in tomato sauce. It was later reintroduced by Heinz in 2005.
Alphabet Soup is 150 Years Old - This Is How We Started Spelling With Our Food at Trivia Happy
Anelli   are small, thin rings of pasta. They are generally used for soups and pasta salads. A smaller version of anelli is anellini , which is about one-quarter of the size. 
Anelli pasta is used in the production of Campbell's Franco-American SpaghettiOs.
Barbine  is a type of long strand Italian pasta that is very similar to capellini. It is generally available in a coiled nest shape.During the Renaissance, they were considered the epitome of culinary art because they were very difficult to make so thin. Usually available in coiled nest form, they are typically served in a broth or with a light sauce.
Bigoli   is an extruded pasta in the form of a long and thick strand. Initially bigoli were made with buckwheat flour, but are now more commonly made with whole wheat flour, and sometimes include duck eggs. The preparation is then extruded through a bigolaro, from which the pasta gets its name.Bigoli is a term used in Veneto; a similar type of pasta called pici is produced in Tuscany.
There are different versions of the origins of the bigoli. They only agree that they originated in what is now the Veneto region. According to one theory, its origin dates back to the 14th century during the Venetian Turkish Wars. After the Turks sank numerous Venetian ships loaded with durum, the remaining flour was stretched with common wheat flour. The new mixture was used for a dough, formed into a large spaghetto and called a bigolo.
In 1604, a pasta maker from Padua named Bartolomio Veronese, known as Abbondanza, patented a press for making bigoli. This was the real triumph of the bigoli.According to another version, the bigoli are the result of a further development of a type of pasta that was already widespread in Northeast Italy. They were first mentioned as bigoli in the 15th century at the court of the Bishop of Eraclea.
Hyman, Clarissa . "Spaghetti con tutti . . . . . . and linguine, rigatoni, bucatini and the rest. Clarissa Hyman gorges herself on an Umbrian outbreak of pastamania". Financial Times; London. Financial Times Ltd.
Gianotti, Peter M. . "Fresh seafood with an Italian accent". Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News. Newsday Inc.
Boccoli is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:
Bucatini , also known as perciatelli , is a thick spaghetti-like pasta with a hole running through the center. It is common throughout Lazio, particularly Rome. 
The similar ziti  consists of long hollow rods which are also smooth in texture and have square-cut edges; "cut ziti" are ziti cut into shorter tubes. There is also a wider version of ziti, zitoni .
The name comes from the Italian buco, meaning "hole", while bucato or its Neapolitan language variant perciato means "pierced".
Bucatini is a tubed pasta made of hard durum wheat flour and water. Its length is 25–30 cm  with a 3 mm  diameter. The average cooking time is nine minutes.
In Italian cuisine, bucatini is served with buttery sauces, guanciale, vegetables, cheese, eggs, and anchovies or sardines. One of the most common sauces to serve with bucatini is the Amatriciana sauce, bucatini all'amatriciana. It is traditionally made with guanciale, a type of cured meat taken from the pork jowl.Raw bucatini can be used as a biodegradable drinking straw.
Standard pasta machines will roll out sheets of flat pasta which are then cut into ribbons to make flat, ribbon-style pasta like fettuccine, tagliatelle, or pappardelle. Bucatini, on the other hand, has to be extruded rather than rolled.
The pasta dough is fed into a machine that forces it through a perforated disk, very similar to a meat grinder. The shape of the pasta depends on the shape of the perforations. Bucatini are made with a disk with tiny circular perforations, which forces the pasta dough to emerge in long tubes. The tubes are then trimmed off to the desired length and then either cooked fresh or dried.
Bucatini can be made at home with a stand mixer and a pasta extruder. Since bucatini has a hole in the middle, it must be handled gently so as not to squeeze the hole shut prior to eating.
Calamarata is a kind of thick ring pasta, often dyed with black squid ink to resemble sliced calamari. It originates from Naples. Calamaretti is the smaller variant of calamarata.
Cannelloni  are a cylindrical type of lasagna generally served baked with a filling and covered by a sauce in Italian cuisine. Popular stuffings include spinach and ricotta or minced beef. The shells are then typically covered with tomato sauce.
Cannelloni are also a typical dish of the Catalan cuisine, where they are called canelons and traditionally consumed on Saint Stephen's Day.Early references to macheroni ripieni  can be traced back to 1770, but the word cannelloni seems to have appeared at the turn of the 20th century. Manicotti are the American version of cannelloni, though the term may often refer to the actual baked dish. The original difference may be that cannelloni consists of pasta sheets wrapped around the filling, and manicotti is machine-extruded cylinders filled from one end.
Capellini  is a thin variety of Italian pasta, with a diameter ranging from 0.85 to 0.92 mm . It is made in the form of long, thin strands, similar to spaghetti. Capelli d'angelo  is even thinner, with a diameter ranging from 0.78 to 0.88 mm . It is often sold in a nest-like shape.
Capelli d'angelo has been popular in Italy since at least the 14th century and is known for its delicate, light texture. Its thinness best suits it for soups or dishes with light sauces, such as those made with seafood or vegetables. It is also a popular choice for dishes with Asian-inspired flavors, as it can easily absorb the flavors of the accompanying ingredients.
Cappelletti  are ring-shaped Italian pasta so called for the characteristic shape that resembles a hat . Compared to tortellini, they have a different shape, larger size, thicker dough and different filling.
The origins of the recipe, very widespread on a territorial basis, are ancient, traditionally and historically linked to Emilia-Romagna and Marche.  From these areas it then spread over the centuries, becoming a typical dish in various cities. Some recent sources specifically indicate the area in the Cesena-Ferrara-Reggio Emilia triangle as the place of origin, others report the Marche as a land where cappelletti are of ancient tradition.
A first reference to this culinary preparation could perhaps be found linked to Ferrara, in a text dating back to 1556 by Cristoforo di Messisbugo, former cook of the Este court with Alfonso I d’Este, Duke of Ferrara, at the beginning of the 16th century. The traditional recipe for cappelletti includes, among the ingredients of the filling  chicken, pork, veal or beef , Parmesan, eggs and nutmeg. For the puff pastry there are no particular differences compared to the one prepared for all the other types of filled pasta. In the Ferrara area we distinguish the caplìt, filled with meat and cheeses, to be consumed in broth, and the larger caplàz, with a pumpkin-based filling, to be eaten dry with meat sauce  or butter and sage.Cappelletti are also traditional in Reggio nell’Emilia and Parma, especially during the Christmas holidays. The Reggiano type is shaped like a small hat or similar to a ring .
Cappelletti are the dish of choice for large parties in Romagna. The Cucinario of an ancient noble family of Lugo, written by Count Giovanni Manzoni, mentions seven different recipes. Called caplét in Romagna, they follow slightly different recipes in the filling generally based on cheese and ricotta, spiced with nutmeg and grated lemon zest, in some cases with the addition of capon breast, or other meat. In Faenza they have a filling  of soft cheeses, Parmesan, nutmeg and without any type of meat and are consumed exclusively in chicken broth. In the Imola area, however, the filling is based on meat. The dough is cut into squares of about 5 cm per side; in each of them a spoonful of stuffing is inserted. They are enjoyed in meat broth. It is a good idea not to remove them immediately from the pot: they should be left to soak for a few minutes so that they absorb the broth well.
Pellegrino Artusi, a native of Forlimpopoli, in his Science in the kitchen and the art of eating well, reports recipe no. 7: Romagna-style cappelletti, with ricotta-based filling , capon breast or pork loin, to be cooked in capon broth.
In Marche and Umbria the cappelletti are considered traditional typical pasta. While tortellini in some areas of Marche came only after the war, cappelletti have always been homemade throughout the region, especially in the northern area, linguistically and culturally closer to Romagna. In Marche recipes, the filling is based on stewed meats including the "smells" of celery, carrot and a little onion, passed through a meat grinder, to which raw eggs, grated aged cheese, nutmeg and grated lemon zest are sometimes added. Some annual celebrations, such as large Christmas lunches, include cappelletti in broth as a traditional first course.
In Umbria, cappelletti in capon broth are also considered the typical dish on New Year's Day. Unlike Romagna, where the filling is made with cheeses, the Umbrian recipe also includes mixed meat: veal, turkey or chicken and pork loin.
Dry cappelletti, with meat sauce or other sauce, are a recent creation.
Casarecce  are short twists of pasta originating from Sicily which appear rolled up on themselves.Casarecce pairs well with cream/cheese, meat, napolitana, seafood, pesto and vegetables.
Cascatelli  are a short pasta shape with a flat strip and a pair of ruffles parallel to each other, each of which sticks out at a 90-degree angle from the strip. The ruffles give the shape texture and create a "sauce trough".
This modern pasta shape was developed in 2019 by the American food podcaster Dan Pashman in collaboration with the New York pasta company Sfoglini. The shape is a hybrid of the bucatini and mafalda pasta types, highlighting the half-tube components and ribbon-shaped ruffle pasta respectively, and was designed to meet Pashman's preferred characteristics in a pasta shape.
The name comes from the Italian cascate meaning 'waterfalls', while cascatelle means 'little waterfalls'. Pashman decided to end it with -elli to sound like more traditional Italian pasta names that often end with the masculine plural diminutive suffixes -ini, -elli, -illi, -etti to convey the sense of 'little'. While acknowledging that the correct Italian spelling for the plural of waterfall is cascatelle, he argued "I think we can take some poetic license. If we end it with an i, cascatelli, it sounds more like a pasta name". The name cascatelli received trademark protection in the United States for use in association with pasta in March 2021. Other potential names had included Italian variations on ridged dinosaurs, millipedes or the musical bass clef.
Dan Pashman, host of The Sporkful podcast, decided to make a new "ideal" pasta shape that needed to have the perfect bite, an appealing texture, and hold the right amount of sauce. The American pasta company Sfoglini worked with Pashman to produce the product.Pashman coined terms to describe the three qualities to talk about pasta shapes:
"Forkability" – how easy it is to get a pasta shape on your fork and keep it there
"Sauceability" – how well a sauce sticks to it
"Toothsinkability" – how satisfying it is to bite into.The pasta was officially released in 2021, after a three-year research and development process. That process is documented in The Sporkful podcast series "Mission: ImPASTAble".
Cascatelli are a half-tubed pasta made of hard durum wheat flour and water, or semolina. The suggested cook time is 13–17 minutes.
Casoncelli  are a kind of stuffed pasta, typical of the culinary tradition of Lombardy, in the north-central part of Italy.The shell typically consists of two sheets of pasta, about 4 cm  long, pressed together at the edges, like that of ravioli. Alternatively it is a disk folded in two and shaped like a sweet wrapper. Casoncelli in the style alla bergamasca are typically stuffed with a mixture of bread crumbs, egg, Parmesan, ground beef, salami or sausage. Variants of filling include spinach, raisins, amaretto biscuits, pear, and garlic; while the casoncelli alla bresciana are stuffed with a mixture of bread crumbs, Parmesan, garlic, parsley, nutmeg and broth. They are typically served with burro e salvia: melted butter flavored with sage leaves.
Castellane  is a commune in the Alpes-de-Haute-Provence department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region in Southeastern France. With a population of 1,470 , it has the distinction of being France's least populated subprefecture, ahead of Largentière in Ardèche.
Its inhabitants are referred to as Castellanais  and Castellanaises .
Castellane is a very old city located upstream of the Gorges du Verdon. The city is 724 metres  above sea level.The Roc, or the Roc of Notre-Dame, overlooks the city from 184 m  above. It has been occupied since the High Middle Ages and is a registered historical site. It can be accessed from the centre of town behind the old Church of St. Andrew. The walk takes about 25 minutes.
Two reservoirs are located in the territory of Castellane:
Lake Chaudanne, created by the dam of the same name, the Barrage de Chaudanne.The area has two water gaps: 
the clue de Taulanne containing the Asse de Blieux river and the Route Napoléon along its banks.
the clue de Chasteuil, which contains the Verdon valley.The GR 4 hiking trail crosses through the town. The neighboring municipalities are:
Castellane features a warm-summer mediterranean climate , bordering on a mediterraneran continental climate . Summers are warm to hot and dry, while winters are cold and snowy.
The commune is part of the Jurassic limestone area of the French Prealps in Provence, formed by the tectonic upheaval of the Alps during the Tertiary. Limestone deposits run the length of the Verdon river, giving rise to spectacular gorges formed through karst erosion. Around Castellane older formations surface, such as gypsum and Triassic black marl.Neighboring mountains and passes
The commune contains 7,000 acres  of wood and forests . The Massif du Montdenier extends over the western part of the commune .
Castellane's name appeared in texts for the first time circa 965–977 as Petra Castellana. The name breaks down into three Occitan terms, pèira, castel and the suffix -ana, which means fortified rock and village, and could be translated as "Castellane rock", in other words, the rock that has a fortified village, or simply the stronghouse or stronghold. Castellane is called Castelana in the Provençal dialect in the classical norm, or Castelano in the Mistralian.
The former commune of Castillon, now beneath the lake, appeared around 1300 as de Castilhone, an Occitan word for a small castle.The first part of the name "Chasteuil" is obscure, but the second, -ialo, is a Celtic suffix for "clearing".
The village of Robion has the same name as the river that and flows through it  into the Jabron River and takes its source from the Massif du Robion to the east of the village. The name in Rubione, which first appeared for it in 1045, is derived from the vulgar Latin robigonem, a distortion of the classical Latin robiginem for rust, according to Ernest Nègre. Charles Rostaing, on the other hand, believed that the name might predate the Gauls and designate a steep-sided ravine.Taloire, was first mentioned in 1095 when the château of Taloire was given to the Abbey of St. Victor, Marseille, which became the lay seigneur of the fief. It derived its name from the Occitan talador, meaning soldiers especially recruited to devastate the land of an adversary. Adding the -ia suffix designates, either a land inhabited by these devastators, or a land devastated by the taladors. Rostaing thought this name also probably also predated the Gauls. Bénédicte and Jean-Jacques Fénié noted a tautology: *Tal- et *Tor-, the teo roots. The name "Taloire" contains two terms designating a mountain.
In 2017, the unemployment rate of the Castellane population was 20.1%, up from 12.4% in 2007. The largest sector of activity in December 2015 was the public sector  with 45 businesses and 280 paid workers.
The inhabitants of Castellane are known back to a very early date. Neolithic nomads came through the area; the oldest traces date back to 6000 BC. A grotto with cave paintings exists in the commune but its location is kept confidential to protect the artwork; Bronze Age tombs have also been discovered in a cave in Castillon. Ligurian tribes occupied the territory. The Suetrii or Suètres later created an oppidum  named Ducelia, near the Roc. They mined salt in the area and sold it. Most of the communes attached to Castellane today were peopled by the Suetrii. Taulanne was the exception, inhabited by the people who had their capital in Senez. 
The region was conquered by Augustus in 14 BC. Castellane was attached to the Roman province of Alpes-Maritimes and began to grow. Homes were established in the plain, and the city was named Civitas Saliniensum . The name of the town later became Salinae.Several roads left from or passed through the town:
Via Salinaria, going west towards Durance and the current Château-Arnoux
Via Ventiana, from Cimiez to Sisteron by way of Vence; a carved milestone from the beginning of the third century was found on this road in the Saint-Pierre pass six miles from Castellane
a road towards Entrevaux  by way of BriançonnetResidents first settled on the bank of the Verdon to mine the saline sources which are still visible today. A treasure of antiquity, 34 gold coins issued by Arcadius and Honorius, were discovered in 1797 in Taloire. A limestone funerary stele for one Julius Trofimus, dating back to Roman times, was discovered near the old chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Plan. Until 1942 it was used in a retaining wall, and can be found today in the public garden of the savings bank. The inscription is included in the Inscriptions latines de Gaule narbonnaise  collection of Gallia Narbonensis Roman inscriptions and is listed on the historic register.
A diocese was founded in the fifth century: its seat was transferred to Senez before the 6th century however and despite all attempts to have it return to Castellan it remained there until it was closed in the French Revolution.
In the early ninth century, the area around the current town of Castellane was inhabited by only 84 people. In 812 the area was invaded by Moors, also sometimes called Saracens; they destroyed Salines, the early settlement near the salt marshes. The inhabitants of Salines took refuge on the summit of the Roc and built a stronghold there, building the first Notre-Dame there, inaugurated in 852, in thanks for the refuge. Some vestiges of this site, which was named Sinaca in 813 and Petra Castellana in 965, are still visible at the place now known as Le Signal. People later also settled at the foot of the Roc in the valley bottom.
In 852 a lord of Castellane, possibly named Guillaume won a victory against the Moors and put together a barony of 46 village communities stretching from Cotignac in Var to the south, to Thorame-Haute in the north, and from Soleilhas to Esparron-de-Verdon. The Barony was considered a small sovereign state ruled by hereditary sovereign barons.  Over time Castellane came to have three co-existing sites:
the Rupes, on top of the Rock, was soon entirely occupied by the castle built in 977 by Pons-Arbaud and Aldebert
the Castrum, halfway up, on a larger site but easy to defend;
the Burgum, current site of Castellane, easily accessible, facilitating trade.In 1189, Baron de Castellane Boniface III was attacked by Alfonso I of Provence. He had refused to do homage, explaining that he was a vassal of the Holy Roman Empire. But in the face of brute force he was forced to bend the knee. Another war broke out in 1227 between the Provence and Boniface of Castellane, presumably the son. In 1257 Charles II—then still just prince of Salernes, gave the castle to the Austinian monks. In 1262, Charles I of Anjou defeated Boniface of Castellane and made Castelle the seat of a baile. In the thirteenth century, the family of Castellane lost possession of the city to the Counts of Provence. To protect themselves from attack, in addition to the protections for the city, Castellane built a series of fortified outposts at Demandolx, La Garde, Chasteuil, Rougon, and perhaps Taloire. In 1300 a small Jewish community of eight households was established in the area.The Black Death reached Castellane in 1348, and was followed by a devastating flood of the Verdon River. The capture and death of Queen Joanna I of Naples created a succession issue in the county of Provence, the cities of the Union of Aix  supporting Charles de Duras against Louis I of Anjou.
Lord of Castellane Louis d'Anduse, also often known as Lord of La Voulte, sided with the Duke of Anjou from the spring of 1382, supporting him on condition he participate in an expedition to rescue the queen. Castellane itself initially also backed the Duke, but changed allegiance in February 1386 after the Duke died, and rallied to the cause of the queen-regent, Marie de Blois. She negotiated with them, hoping to set off a chain of similar declarations of support. Guillaume de Forcalquier and his son Jean Raynaut, lords of Eoulx, submitted to the Duchess in July 1386. In 1390, Raymond de Turenne ravaged the surrounding territory and the village of Taulanne and failed to take the city, but did destroy the wooden bridge over the Verdon River.
The wooden bridge over the Verdon was rebuilt in stone in the 15th century. A monastery took care of its maintenance. The bridge on the Place Castellane put Castellane on the frequently travelled routes between the  Mediterranean and the bridge over the Durance river at Sisteron. The bridge toll for the Verdon and the fair began at the end of the Middle Ages. The fair continued until the end of the Ancien Régime, assuring the town relative prosperity.
In the fifteenth century, a community settled on the present site of Taloire. In the middle of the fifteenth century, the upper village was completely abandoned in favor of the lowland site.
At the end of the Middle Ages, the transhumance system developed enormously, herds of sheep from the coast going up into the high Alpine valleys in the summer. Some drailles  crossed the Castellane bridge, where a toll was instituted. At the beginning of the 16th century, between 78,000 and 120,000 head were crossing each year during May and June.
The imperial army of Charles V pillaged the town en 1536.Religious unrest broke out in 1559. Brun de Caille had converted some of the townspeople of Castellane, who gathered at his home for services. A sectarian skirmish took place at his home. Huguenot captain Paulon de Mauvans, of another rich Protestant family, sacked the town in the summer of 1560, then established himself there after reaching an armistice with the governor of Provence, the count of Tende, Claude of Savoy.  The town was attacked by Protestants on 4 October 1574, but the residents of Castellane and its surroundings chased them off, pursuing them as far as the clue de Taulanne.
On 30 January 1586, the Baron of Allemagne and the Duke of Lesdiguières tried to surprise the town. The sneak attack was repulsed and the Baron d'Allemagne was injured by a bullet in his back, which caused the assailants to retreat. The Baron was killed in September of that year trying to lift the siege of his own castle, shot in the head by an arquebus.
The end of the siege of Castellane has since been celebrated every year in the last weekend of January with the Pétardiers ceremony reenacting the attack, and notably the episode of Judith André or Andrau, the goodwife of Barrême, who killed pétardier captain Jean Motte by pouring a kettle of boiling peas over him from the top of the porte de l'Annonciade, reputed to be the weak point in the defenses.
The Jansenist bishop Jean Soanen tried to make the celebrations of Saint-Sacrement, Saint-Jean and Saint-Éloi more sedate and less unbridled, the youth of the town having a tradition of celebrating with drums, music and gunshots. The youth refused, resisted, made even more noise and even revolted, preventing the procession of the octave du Saint-Sacrement from leaving the church on June 22, 1710. In 1726 the youth of Robion, whom the priest wanted to prevent from dancing on Sunday, also revolted.
The Austrian-Sardinian army briefly occupied the town in 1746 during the war of the Austrian Succession. In December 1746, Provence was invaded by an Austrian-Sardinian army. A troop of 2,000 men took Castellane, then the surrounding villages, as far as the château of Trigance. After some difficulty, the Spanish and French armies coordinated a counteroffensive, which began at the start of January when French soldiers under the orders of the Count of Maulévrier took an Austrian outpost in Chasteuil. The Austrian commander, Maximilian Ulysses Browne, reinforced his right wing with four battalions garrisoned at Castellane, and six on the south bank of the Verdon. Seven other battalions formed a second available squadron. Nine battalions and ten squads of Spaniards were stationed in Riez and 2,500 Swiss paid by Spain were stationed at Senez. The 21st of January, Hispano-French troops went on the offensive, commanded by the Frenchman Maulévrier and the Spanish Marquis of Taubin. The Spanish left their quarters by night and advanced on Castellane through the clue de Taulanne, while the French passing through the Vodon gorge. The difficult marches necessary to approach in this way nonetheless allowed a coordinated attack around 7am.
The first outposts were taken without difficulty, which allowed Maulévrier to connect on his left with Taubin, and to send a column of dragoons onto the right bank to cut the Austrians' retreat. This assault took the Austrian-Sardinians fortifications without difficulty, the French-Spanish entered the town and did prevent the last Austrians from retreating. In all, they took 287 Austrians prisoner, including the baron de Neuhaus, the lieutenant-general in command. The Austrian-Sardinians also had a hundred-odd dead, versus twenty Franco-Spanish soldiers. The villages of La Garde, Eoulx, Robion, Taloire, Trigance and Comps were evacuated on January 22.
In 1760, a tax imposed by the king of Piedmont-Sardinia on sales of cloth brought a large reduction in the town's textile production. Production of cadis, a local form of wool, and of cordeillat, a coarse woolen fabric, continued until the Revolution, and was used by the local residents.
Until the Revolution salt was produced from two local salt marshes.
On the eve of the French Revolution, several fiefs existed on the actual territory of the commune: Éoulx, Le Castellet-de-Robion , Chasteuil, Taulanne and Castillon, plus Castellane. On the same territory there were nine parishes: Castillon, La Baume, Taulanne, La Palud, Chasteuil, Taloire, Villars-Brandis, Robion, et Castellane. The parish of Éoulx overlapped the community of La Garde.
The city of Castellane alone paid more tax than Digne; it was an important rural town, both for its judiciary functions  and for its production, with twelve factories: among which were six hat shops, two wax factories, one faïence works, one tile factory, one silk fabrication works, and the leather industry was also represented. A royal post office was also installed in Castellane near the end of the Ancien Régime.
The cloth industry, already well established in the preceding century, prospered in the first half of the 19th century. But cottage industries were replaced by the Barneaud factory, built in the late 1830s on the model of the Honnorat factory in Saint-André-de-Méouilles. It employed nine workers in 1872, then disappeared in 1878.The Revolution and the Empire brought social reforms, including proportional taxation based on the assets. In order to put this in place on a precise basis, a land registry was drawn up. The loi de finances du 15 septembre 1807 specified its methods, but its accomplishment took time to get started, since the officials conducting the cadastre dealt with the communes in successive geographic groups. Not until 1834–1835 was the land registry known as the Napoleonic cadastre of Castellane and its associated communes finished.The coup d'état of 2 December 1851 committed by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte against the Second Republic provoked an armed uprising in the Basses-Alpes in defense of the Constitution. Insurgent republicans took a number of cities in the center and south of France, including Digne, the prefecture of the Basses-Alpes, and held them for several days. The local fighters held out the longest, almost three weeks. But this allowed Bonaparte to portray himself as the protector of France, and many participants were sent to penal colonies in Lambesa and Cayenne, banished or less permanently exiled. Eight inhabitants of Castellane were brought before the commission mixte; their most common penalty was deportation to Algeria.
On 10 September 1926, the sous-préfecture was eliminated in the economic plan of Raymond Poincaré, then re-established by the Vichy government in June 1942.
An internment camp was built in Chaudanne during World War II. Seventeen Jews were arrested in Castellane and deported. On 9 December 1943, the French armée secrète  and the Francs-tireurs et partisans  attacked the construction site at the Castillon dam and seized five tonnes of explosives.The commune was liberated 18 August 1944 by the 36th division of British infantry.
In the mid-20th century wine growing for local consumption ended.
The Rock which dominates the city, rising to 930 metres   above the Verdon), is a listed historical  site.
The oldest monument in the territory of the commune is the dolmen of Pierres Blanches Neolithic-Chalcolithic,  a registered historical site on private property. The Roc towers 184 metres  above the community of Castellane.
The Musée des sirènes et fossiles and the Moyen Verdon are networked with other museums in the Gorges du Verdon, including the home of Pauline Gréoux-les-Bains, the museum of the life of yesteryear Esparron-de-Verdon, home gorges du Verdon in La Palud-sur-Verdon and the Museum of prehistory in Quinson gorges du Verdon.
The bridge of the Roc, which carries the Sisteron-Vence road across the river, was built in the first decade of the fifteenth century, replacing a succession of several wooden bridges, the last spanning the Verdon in 1300 and destroyed by Raimond de Turenne in 1390. The construction of the new bridge parallels that of Nyons  long), Pont de Claix  long), Tournon  long) and Entrechaux  long). Pope Benedict XIII granted indulgences to anyone who gave alms to finance its construction. The rearguard of the Austrian-Sardinian army was caught there by a sortie from the garrison.
The tympana of the Roc bridge have been restored several times. Metal tie rods were laid in 1697–99. The bridge as a whole was restored in 2008 and closed to traffic. It was decommissioned in 1967 and delisted in 1982. The bridge and its approaches have been a registered historical site since 1940.
The library is in the former convent of the Visitation, founded in 1644. The eighteenth-century castle at Éoulx is richly decorated with plasterwork, including the first floor ceilings, the panels surrounding the doors, the rosette in the second-floor ceilings. Externally, it has two towers, with arched openings. The town hall is housed in the building that used to be the savings bank. It resembles a villa: balconies supported by large corbels and thick balusters, and a façade adorned with a pediment.
Catellane's largest fountain, in the main square, features a pyramid on which is carved a compass crossed by a carpenter's square, two chisels and a mallet, emblems of the Freemasons. At the top of the pyramid is a pedestal with a ball. On National Street, two doors have transoms or capitals with volutes, and one lintel is decorated with carved foliage. In the town, several buildings, mostly dry stone, have been recorded in the inventory of topographic DRAC. One of them, in Rayaup, dates from the eighteenth century .
The Chapel of Our Lady of the Rock, dating from the High Middle Ages, dominates the city from atop the Rock and belongs to the former Convent of Mercy. But only the wall and the south façade date from the twelfth century; the building was half demolished during the wars of religion and rebuilt in 1590.
Crumbling by 1703, the chapel was again rebuilt in the early eighteenth century and once more in 1860. A capital adorned with foliage and scrolls dates from the Renaissance.
a statue of the Virgin, in marble, possibly 16th century
two paintings, St. Charles Borromeo and St. Francis and St. Jeanne de Chantal, on the historic register for both the paintings and their gilded frames, bearing the arms of the Bishop of Senez Duchaîne and dating from the seventeenth century.It received numerous votive offerings in the 19th and 20th centuries, including:
a painting given after a vow to Our Lady, dating from 1757, and registered;
a painting given after the cholera epidemic in 1835, registered;
a painting given by a released prisoner, dated 1875 ;
a painting given in thanks after a smallpox epidemic, dated 1870, registered;
a painting given by a person who escaped a shipwreck in 1896, registered.
Parts of the old parish church of Saint-Victor date from the mid-11th century. It is listed as an historical building. It was constructed in a similar manner and on the same plane as the Church of St. Andrew in the old village above the modern-day town, and was formerly the seat of a priory of the Abbey of St. Victor in Marseille.
The apse is decorated with Lombard bands, which have been described as remarkable, each arch carved from a single stone. Unusually for the region, it has a Roman nave, with arches rebuilt in the 17th century. The base of the tower dates from 1445, but its top was rebuilt in the 18th century following damage by Protestants in 1560.
The altar dates from 1724. The choir is adorned with paintings framed in wood, and an Annunciation carved in relief from gilded wood . The wooden furniture, the stalls, the pulpit and the lectern with its hexagonal base, form an interesting 18th and 19th-century set, some of which is on the historic register. The furnishings also include an early 17th-century silver chalice with an unusual multilobed foot, also on the historic register.
The Church of the Sacred Heart, now a parish church, was built in 1868–1873 by Father Pougnet and dedicated to Our Lady. It was widened by side aisles in 1896. The first transept is occupied by a platform.  The interior is Gothic, with the tower built against the façade. The furnishings include some registered historical items:two silver custodes, cases for carrying communion hosts; one dating from around 1650 and one from the 18th century, a gilded wooden 18th-century cross, and a 16th-century silver chalicethe Chapel of St. Joseph is part of the Augustinian church rebuilt to replace the chapel of the Blue Penitents. It was partly demolished to widen the boulevard Saint-Michel
the 12th-century Saint Thyrse Chapel near Robion was restored in 1942 and declared a historical monument in 1944, It is the earliest Romanesque  church in the region.
Saint-Pons in Eoulx, unchanged since its construction, not arched, has preserved the original cornices from the middle or late twelfth century, also the thirteenth century according to the Direction régionale des affaires culturelles . This building is on the historic register. It has a flat copper collection plate believed to be 17th-centuryruins of the Church of St. André – 13th century, in ruins since the 18th century 
The 12th-century church of Notre-Dame-du-Plan, a former priory in Castellane
Saint-Pons – 16th century, with bell dated 1436, in Robion
Saint-Jean in Taloire, may have been built as early as the 13th or 14th century, but the 15th century seems more likely. It was damaged by the earthquake of 1951.
Saint-Jean-Baptiste in Villars-Brandis has an exceptional late 15th-century copper thurible  with bilevel windows.
Chapelle Sainte-Victoire in a place called Angles: late 19th century at the earliest
chapels of Saint-Pons Blaron , Saint-Antoine and Notre Dame  in Eoulx,
St. Trophimus, built into the mountain above Petit Robion after a chapel built below was repeatedly damaged by rocks falling onto its roof, has a 17th-century silver chalice and a flat copper 16th-century collection plate, both registered historical items.
The outline of the walls of Petra Castellana, the ancient city beneath the current one, is still visible, and in places they reach seven meters in height. The walls are thought to date from the 12th century, although a June 2016 archeological excavation sought to date them more precisely. Only one tower survives of the fourteen that originally reinforced these walls: the 14th-century pentagonal keep. This keep, which dominates the town center, is on private property but was declared a historic monument in 1921.
Construction on the wall enclosing the lower town began in 1359, with the permission of the Count of Provence, Louis I of Naples. Traces of this wall are still visible in the square towers on the front of the houses on the square. Corbels, which could support defenses  are visible on their façades.
Two of the original gates in the wall remain:
the gate of the Annunciation or of the pétardiers, flanked by two towers, high ground in the resistance of 1586;
the gate of the clock, also called St. Augustine's gate, set in a square tower. A passage crosses under the tower through an arch. The tower is listed on the register of historic places.One of the towers in the Saint-Michel neighborhood has been home to a dovecote since 1585.
Casunziei  is the name in Ladin for a kind of filled fresh pasta, consisting of a filling sealed between two layers of thin pasta dough, folded in a typical half-moon shape. They are commonly homemade and are typical of the culinary tradition of the Dolomites area, in the north-eastern part of Italy, especially the provinces of Belluno, Bolzano, and Trento.The square shell, typically about 3.5 by 3.5 cm, consists of two sheets of pasta pressed together at the borders, like those of ravioli.
The pre-cooked and finely ground filling varies from area to area and typically includes vegetables and ricotta cheese. The original recipes from Cortina d'Ampezzo are the "red" variety  with beet, potato, and red Veronese turnips; and the "green" one  with spinach and wild-growing erba cipollina in the filling. Other varieties have fillings of pumpkin or radishes.  The filling may included other ingredients such as ham, mushrooms, other kinds of cheese, or poppy seeds.  In particular, the casunziei all'ampezzana have a filling of red and yellow turnips and are typically served with melted butter, poppy seeds, and Parmesan cheese. Other servings are sage-flavored melted butter, or a radish-based sauce.At Cencenighe, casunziei served with ground poppy seeds and honey were a traditional Christmas Eve dish.
Cavatappi  is macaroni formed in a helical tube shape. Cavatappi is the Italian word for corkscrews. It is known by other names, including cellentani, amori, serpentini, spirali, torselli, tortiglione, or scoobi doo. It is not to be confused with a different pasta shape that is often called "corkscrew pasta" and that also goes by several names, that other shape being fusilli, also known as rotini, eliche, girandole, tortiglioni, or spirali, which is distinguished by fusilli being a twisted flat pasta rather than cavatappi's hollow tube shape. Cavatappi is usually scored with lines or ridges  on the surface. Cavatappi is a type of macaroni, or thick, hollow pasta that is made without using eggs. It may be yellow in color, like most pastas, or have vegetables or a food coloring added to make it green or red. It can be used in a variety of dishes including salads, soups, and casseroles.
Cavatappi is an Italian word created by compounding cava and tappi, which literally means "stopper  extractor" . It is known by many other names.
Cavatappi is a generic name adopted by other brands that imitated Barilla's cellentani. This particular shape was born in the 1970s at Barilla in Parma when a set of pasta dies had been mistakenly made with a spiral  set of lines. These produced pasta in a spiral or spring  shape. Barilla decided to name it after one of the most famous showpeople of the time, Adriano Celentano, who was nicknamed "il molleggiato". As this name was trademarked by Barilla, other pasta producers had to use other names, such as cavatappi .
The cavatappi shape is perhaps best described as a ridged tube extruded into a helix shape through a small number of rotations. The number of turns is commonly in the range of one to three .
Cavatappi is used with Italian-style foods such as cavatappi Amatriciana and cavatappi pomodoro. It is mostly found in tomato-based pasta sauces and is associated closely with different types of cheeses such as mozzarella, Parmesan, and provolone. It is a common choice for macaroni and cheese.
Cavatelli  are small pasta shells made from semolina or other flour dough, that resemble miniature hot dog buns, commonly cooked with garlic and broccoli or rapini broccoli rabe, or simply with tomato sauce. A variant adds ricotta cheese to the dough mix. Another variant with seafood is very popular in seaside cities and villages.
Many varieties and local names of cavatelli exist, including orecchie di prete . In Apulia, a number of varieties of cavatelli have specific names including pizzicarieddi.
A particular variety of cavatelli is typical of the area of Teggiano in Campania, where they are referred to as parmatieddi . Parmatieddi are larger than cavatelli and flat-shaped. They are obtained by rolling a stick dough with three fingers of one hand, instead of with a single finger as done for the common cavatelli. Parmatieddi are usually served as a first course on Palm Sunday because their shape, similar to that of a tree leaf, recalls that of a palm.
Cencioni  is a type of pasta. The name derives from the Italian for little rag.  Cencioni are oval and petal-shaped, with a slight curve, larger and flatter than orecchiette, with a more irregular shape and a rough texture to one side to help sauces cling better.
Conchiglie , commonly known as "shells" or "seashells", is a type of pasta. It is usually sold in the plain durum wheat variety, and also in colored varieties which use natural pigments, such as tomato extract, squid ink or spinach extract. The shell shape of the pasta allows the sauce to adhere to it. A miniature variety called conchigliette is also available.
The name derives from the Italian word for seashell . The Italian word conchiglie and the English word "conch" share the same Greek root in the form of κοχύλι , which means "shell".
In the 1930s, fascism celebrated the Italian colonial empire with new pasta shapes recalling the African lands: tripoline , bengasine , assabesi , and abissine . In 2021, after an outcry in objection to pasta brand La Molisana's advertising campaign, abissine were renamed as conchiglie . However, some complained, claiming this renaming constituted cancel culture.
Coralli is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:
Corzetti or Croxetti  are a kind of pasta typical of the Ligurian cuisine of north-west Italy, and traditional also in the area of Novi Ligure just across the border with Piedmont in the Province of Alessandria. Corzetti originated in Liguria, in Northern Italy along the border with France, during the middle ages. The name itself derives from a 14th-century Genoan coin, the corzetto.There are different kinds of corzetti. Those from the Val Polcevera, one of the principal valleys of the area of Genoa are made in "figure of eight" shape. Elsewhere  corzetti stampæ  are found. These are small, thin rounds of pasta that are given an embossed decoration using a special wooden hand-tool. The embossing helps the pasta to hold its sauce better. A pasta with a similar name can also be found in neighbouring Piedmont, but its shape is more akin to that of orecchiette.Corzetti are still produced in small batches near Genoa. In the past they were made by local peasants and used by aristocratic families as a display of wealth and status.
Sheets of pasta are stamped and cut into circles approximately 4 centimetres  in diameter from flat pasta sheets with a mold to create the distinctive patterns. The combination mold/cutter may be made of hand-carved wood or a bronze die.  The stamping may be done by hand or by machine, with the hand-stamped versions being more elaborate.  The detail forms ridges that allow sauce to cling and add flavor.The pasta typically has patterns on both sides, with an intricate design on one side and a simpler pattern on the other. Whereas they once featured a family coat of arms, the fancier side now features a regional coat of arms or the maker's trademark. Typical symbols on the other side are a cross , fruit, family initials, mortar and pestle, sunsets, sailboats, or palm trees. In Italy they may be used as wedding favors or for other events, in which case an artisan craftsman is commissioned to make the die for people to prepare the pasta at home.
A pasta dough is made using flour, water and salt and rolled out into a sheet. The pasta is cut into rounds that are stamped to form the embossed relief, and left to dry for a while. 
Corzetti are usually served with a simple meat or mushroom sauce , pesto, pine nut or walnut sauce, fish sauce, or light cream sauce.
Culurgiones  are a type of Sardinian ravioli-like stuffed pasta. It exists in a version made of potatoes, pecorino cheese and mint, a typical culinary specialty of the sub-region of Ogliastra, and in several other recipes adopted in the rest of the island, such as in Gallura, where the product is aromatized with lemon or orange peel.Since 2015 the Culurgionis d'Ogliastra has been recognized as an IGP product.
The dish, depending on the country of origin, is present in several variants:
in Ogliastra and in the inland areas  they are prepared with fresh durum wheat semolina dough and a filling of Sardinian pecorino cheese , or with a filling of potatoes, garlic and mint as in Gairo, Ulassai and Bari Sardo. In the latter town, instead of pecorino, fiscidu is used, a particular sour cheese put in brine, and the culurgione is closed with the fingers so as to form a small spiga. In Jerzu, the mint is replaced by nepidedda . The culurgione is then cooked in boiling water and seasoned with olive oil, lately with tomato sauce and grated pecorino cheese.
spighitta closing method on both sides is a characteristic of the villages of Jerzu, Talana, Urzulei, Bari Sardo and Ilbono.
in all the mountain areas of Ogliastra and in Bari Sardo the stuffing is strictly accompanied by garlic, while in coastal Ogliastra by sofritta onion.
the culurzones of Barbagia di Ollolai, also imported from Ogliastra, are stuffed with fresh pecorino cheese and are served with a tomato sauce and diced pork, or alternatively with tomato sauce and fresh sausage, all topped with grated aged pecorino cheese.
in southern Sardinia, and generally in the Campidano area, there are other recipes for culurgiones: the ravioli is prepared with fresh durum wheat semolina pasta with a filling of fresh sheep or goat ricotta cheese, egg and saffron . After cooking, the culurgioni is seasoned with fresh tomato sauce, chilli pepper and basil and a sprinkling of pecorino or other grated cheese. In Teulada, on the other hand, a simpler recipe is preferred, with a filling of fresh goat cheese  in the quadrangular culurgiones . The seasoning is usually tomato sauce and a sprinkling of aged goat cheese.
In the village of Ulassai, until the 60s, the tradition was to consume culurgiones exclusively on All Souls' Day . Throughout Ogliastra and in the villages of Sadali and Esterzili of the Barbagia of Seulo, culurgiones  are not considered just food, but may also be presented as a gift. They were prepared on special occasions such as thanksgiving at the end of the wheat harvest, to remember and honor the dead, on All Souls' Day in November, with sheep fat , to celebrate Carnival in February, with lard . the spighitta, the typical closure of culurgiones, represents the symbol of wheat to propitiate the new agricultural year at the end of August. According to the tradition they were also considered amulets that protected the family from mourning.
Cristina Ortolani . L'Italia della pasta. Touring Editore. p. 131. ISBN 9788836529339.
Mille ricette della cucina italiana. Il più grande e ricco libro illustrato dedicato alla tavola del nostro paese. Rizzoli. 2010. ISBN 9788817041669.
Wikimedia Commons contiene immagini o altri file su culurgiones
Fagottini   is a kind of filled pasta. It is usually filled with vegetables, typically steamed carrots and green beans, ricotta, onion and olive oil. Fagottini are made by cutting sheets of pasta dough into squares, placing the filling on the square, and folding the corners to meet in a point.
Farfalle  are a type of pasta commonly known as bow-tie pasta, ribbon pasta or butterfly pasta. The name is derived from the Italian word farfalle . In the Italian region of Emilia-Romagna, farfalle are known as strichetti .  A larger variation of farfalle is known as farfalloni, while the miniature version is called farfalline.  Farfalle date back to the 16th century in the Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna regions of Northern Italy.
Farfalle come in several sizes, but they all have a distinctive "bow tie" shape. Usually, the farfalle are formed from a rectangle or oval of pasta, with two of the sides trimmed to a ruffled edge and the center pinched together to make the unusual shape of the pasta. A ridged version of the pasta is known as farfalle rigate. Though usable with most sauces, farfalle are best suited to cream and tomato sauces.In addition to plain and whole-wheat varieties, colours are added by mixing certain ingredients into the dough, which also affects the flavor . For example, beetroot can be used for red, spinach for green and cuttlefish ink for black. A tomato variety may also be available. Green, white, and red varieties are often sold together in a mix that recalls the colors of the flag of Italy.
Fettuccine  is a type of pasta popular in Roman cuisine. It is descended from the extremely thin capelli d'angelo of the Renaissance but is a flat, thick pasta traditionally made of egg and flour . At about 6.5 mm , it is wider and thicker than, but similar to, the tagliatelle typical of Bologna, which are more common elsewhere in Italy and often used as a synonym. Spinach fettuccine is made from spinach, flour, and eggs.
The terms "fettucce" and "fettuccelle" are often used as synonyms for this pasta, but the former term is more precisely used for wider  and the latter for narrower  forms of the same pasta.Fettuccine is often classically eaten with sugo d'umido  or ragù di pollo . Dishes made with fettuccine include fettuccine Alfredo, which—born in Rome as a homemade pasta dish topped with an emulsion of butter and grated cheese—evolved in the mid-20th century, achieving significant popularity in the U.S. and becoming a cornerstone of Italian-American cuisine. In 1920, Hollywood stars Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford celebrated their honeymoon in Europe, during which they tasted fettuccine Alfredo at the Alfredo alla Scrofa restaurant on Via della Scrofa in Rome. The dish, very simple but with a unique and genuine flavor, conquered them immediately. Upon their return to the United States, they told everyone about the famous fettuccine and sealed the memory with the gift of a gold fork and spoon, with the dedication "Alfredo, The King of Fettuccine".Fettuccine is traditionally made fresh , but dried fettuccine can also be bought in stores.
Boni, Ada  . La cucina romana: piatti tipici e ricette dimenticate di una cucina genuina e ricca di fantasia. Quest'Italia . Vol. 48. Rome: Newton Compton Editori. ISBN 88-8183-204-6.
Carnacina, Luigi; Buonassisi, Vincenzo . Roma in Cucina . Florence/Milan: Giunti Martello. ICCU IT\ICCU\NAP\0192450.
Fileja  is a type of pasta typically from the province of Vibo Valentia, Calabria. Made of durum wheat semolina and water, they are prepared by wrapping a sheet of pasta around a thin cane , creating a hollow tube approximately 20 cm in length.
Filled pasta or stuffed pasta is pasta, usually sealed, surrounding a variety of fillings.  Such pasta is especially common in non-tropical regions of Eurasia.  Examples of filled pasta include ravioli and tortellini.
The pasta wrappers are usually fresh pasta, but dried pasta can be used if the wrapper is not sealed.  Premade filled pasta for mass consumption is often pasteurized to set the dough structure.While most filled pastas are sealed on all sides, rotolo ripieno is rolled, but not sealed.  Similar types of pasta include layered pasta such as lasagna, while similar stuffed preparations include kachoris, samosas and tamales.
Fiori  is a decorative shape of extruded pasta. The Italian word fiori means "flowers". This pasta is similar to rotelle.
Foglie d'ulivo   is a variety of handmade pasta made in the shape of olive leaves. It originates from Puglia and Liguria.
Fregula  is a type of pasta from Sardinia. It is similar to North African Berkoukes, Levantine Moghrabieh, and Israeli couscous. Fregula comes in varying sizes, but typically consists of semolina dough that has been rolled into balls 2–3 mm in diameter and toasted in an oven.A typical preparation of fregula is to simmer it in a tomato-based sauce with clams.
Fusilli  are a variety of pasta that are formed into corkscrew or helical shapes. A variant is known as rotini.
In addition to plain and whole wheat varieties, as with any pasta, other colours can be made by mixing other ingredients into the dough, which also affects the flavour, for example, beetroot or tomato for red, spinach for green, and cuttlefish ink for black.
The word fusilli presumably comes from fuso , as traditionally it is "spun" by pressing and rolling a small rod over the thin strips of pasta to wind them around it in a corkscrew shape.
Fusilli may be solid or hollow. A variant type of fusilli are formed as hollow tubes of pasta that are twisted into springs or corkscrews and are called fusilli bucati. Another variant are twisted long lengths as though spaghetti were coiled around an object known as fusilli lunghi. Fusilli Napoletani are flat lengths of coiled pasta formed around a spindle.A variant known as rotini is generally extruded into a twisted shape rather than shaped as a coil spring, although the terms rotini and fusili are often used interchangeably, especially in the United States.
Fusi  is a traditional Istrian pasta from Croatia and Slovenia. The pasta dough is rolled out into a thin sheet, cut into strips three to four centimetres wide, and placed over each other. The strips are then cut diagonally, producing diamond shapes. Two ends of each diamond are then folded over each other to meet in the middle and pinched together, making the fuži look like a bow. It is served with a mild red veal sauce, which is usually made out of onions, tomato paste, white wine and broth.
Garganelli  are a type of egg-based pasta from Emilia-Romagna formed by rolling a flat, square noodle into a cylindrical shape over a ridged wooden board, giving the pasta ridges. Garganelli resembles ribbed quills with points at both ends.While garganelli are very similar to penne, they differ in that a "flap" is clearly visible where one corner of the pasta square adheres to the rest, as opposed to a seamless cylinder in penne.
Garganelli can be served in a variety of recipes; a traditional duck ragù is a common accompaniment and a specialty of the cuisine of Bologna, Italy.
Gemelli  are a type of pasta. The name derives from the Italian word for "twins". It is most often used for making casserole or pasta salads.Gemelli are not twin tubes twisted around one another, as they may appear to be, but rather a single s-shaped strand twisted into a spiral. The strips are glued together to form a single piece of dough, similar to fusilli.
Gnocchi OK-ee, US also  NOH-kee, NAW-, Italian: ; singular gnocco) are a varied family of Pasta in Italian cuisine. They are made of small lumps of dough most traditionally composed of a simple combination of wheat flour, egg, salt, and potato. Variations of the dish supplement the simple recipe with flavour additives, such as semolina flour, cheese,  breadcrumbs, cornmeal or similar ingredients, and possibly including herbs, vegetables, and other ingredients. Base ingredients may be substituted with alternatives such as sweet potatoes for potatoes or rice flour for wheat flour. Such variations are often considered to be non-traditional.Gnocchi are commonly cooked in salted boiling water and then dressed with various sauces. They are usually eaten as a first course  as an alternative to soups  or pasta, but they can also be served as a contorno  to some main courses. Common accompaniments of gnocchi include melted butter with sage, pesto, as well as various sauces. Gnocchi may be homemade, made by specialty stores, or produced industrially and distributed refrigerated, dried, or frozen. Most gnocchi are boiled in water and then served with a sauce. Small soup gnocchi are sometimes made by pressing the dough through a coarse sieve or a perforated spoon.
The word gnocchi may be derived from the Italian word nocchio, meaning a knot in wood, or from nocca, meaning knuckle. It has been a traditional type of Italian pasta since Roman times. It was introduced by the Roman legions during the expansion of the empire into the countries of the European continent. One ancient Roman recipe consists of a semolina porridge-like dough mixed with eggs; similar modern dishes include the baked gnocchi alla romana and Sardinian malloreddus, which do not contain eggs.
After potatoes were introduced to Europe, they were eventually incorporated into gnocchi recipes. Potato gnocchi are particularly popular in Abruzzo, Friuli Venezia Giulia, Veneto, and Lazio.
The dough for gnocchi is often rolled out before it is cut into small pieces about the size of a wine cork or smaller.  The dumplings may be pressed with a textured object, such as a fork or a cheese grater, to make ridges or cut into little lumps. Professional tools exist for this purpose, known as a gnocchi board or a cavarola board.
Gnocchi that are homemade are usually consumed the same day they are made. However, they can be cut into bite-sized dumplings, spread evenly on a baking sheet, frozen, then packaged in an air-tight bag and back into the freezer for later consumption. This method can allow the gnocchi to last two months in the freezer.
Commercial gnocchi are often sold under modified atmospheric packaging and may achieve a shelf life of two weeks or more under refrigeration. Some are sold in vacuum packaging that is shelf-stable, only needing refrigeration once it is opened.
Gnocchi vary in recipe and name across different regions.
Lombard and Tuscan malfatti  are made with ricotta, flour, and spinach, as well as the addition of various other herbs if required. Tuscan gnudi distinctively contains less flour; but some varieties are flour-based, like the Campanian strangulaprievete, the Apulian cavatelli, the Sardinian malloreddus, and so on.  Certain kinds are made of cooked polenta or semolina, which is spread out to dry, layered with cheese and butter, and baked.Gnocchi di pane , derived from the Semmelknödel, is made from breadcrumbs and is popular in Friuli Venezia Giulia, Veneto and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol. Another variety from the latter region is spinach gnocchi.
In Austria, gnocchi are a common main or side dish, known by the original name and Austrian variant, nockerl . As a side dish, they may accompany main dishes like goulash.
Gnocchi are very popular and often served as a dish in coastal Croatia, typically being served as a first course or a side dish with Dalmatinska pašticada. The Croatian name for gnocchi is 'njoki'.
Gnocchi, known locally as "njoki," are common in Slovenia's Primorska region, which shares many of its culinary traditions with neighboring Italy.
An almost identical creation are 'kluski leniwe' , but these do not contain egg. They are often seasoned with various spices like pepper, cinnamon, or allspice. Similar in shape are kopytka , simple dough dumplings in the shape of a diamond, which do not contain cheese. Both are often served with sour cream, butter, caramelized onion, mushroom sauce, or gravy.
In France, gnocchis à la parisienne is a hot dish of dumplings made of choux pastry served with Béchamel sauce.
A specialty of Nice, gnocchi or gnoques de tantifla a la nissarda are made with potatoes, wheat flour, and eggs. Another version including blette  is called merda dé can .
In Provence, potatoes gnocchis can be made in a longer shape and called longettes.
Due to the significant number of Italian immigrants who arrived in Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay, gnocchi, ñoqui  or nhoque  is a popular dish, even in areas with few Italian immigrants. In Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina, there is a tradition of eating gnocchi on the 29th of each month, with some people putting money beneath their plates to bring prosperity. Indeed, in Argentina and Uruguay ñoqui is slang for a bogus employee , who only turns up at the end of the month to receive their salary.
Davidson, Alan. The Oxford Companion to Food, s.v. gnocchi.
Garnerone, Myriam. "Traditions et Cuisine du pays niçois, Recettes Niçoises de nos Grands-Mères". 2008.
Israeli couscous  – sometimes called pearl couscous – is toasted pasta in tiny balls, developed in Israel in the 1950s when rice was scarce due to austerity in Israel.  Despite its name in English, it is not a type of couscous .
Ptitim was created in 1953, during the austerity period in Israel.Israel's first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, asked Eugen Proper, one of the founders of the Osem food company, to devise a wheat-based substitute for rice. The company took up the challenge and developed ptitim, which is made of hard wheat flour and toasted in an oven. Ptitim was initially produced with a rice-shape, but after its success Osem also began to produce a ball-shaped variety inspired by couscous.Consequently, ptitim is sometimes called "Ben-Gurion rice".Ptitim is sometimes confused with Maftoul , which is actually a different food, originating in Lebanon.
Ptitim is made by extruding dough through a round mold, before it is cut and toasted, giving it the uniform natural-grain-like shape and its unique nutty flavor. Unlike common types of pasta and couscous, ptitim was factory-made from the outset, and therefore is rarely seen home-made from scratch. The store-bought product is easy and quick to prepare.In Israel, ptitim is popular among children, who eat it plain, or mixed with fried onion and tomato paste. Ptitim is now produced in ring, star, and heart shapes for added appeal. Varieties made with whole wheat and spelt flour are also available for health-conscious consumers. Ptitim has also been popularised in other countries, and in the United States, it can be found on the menus of contemporary American chefs and in gourmet markets.
Ptitim can be used in many different types of dishes, both hot and cold. The grains retain their shape and texture even when reheated, and they do not clump together. Commonly, ptitim is prepared with sautéed onions or garlic . The ptitim grains may be fried for a short time before adding water. They can also be baked, go in soup, served in a pie, used for stuffing, or made as a risotto. Ptitim may also be used in other dishes as a substitute for pasta or rice. American chef Charlie Trotter has produced a number of recipes for ptitim-based gourmet dishes, even as a dessert.
Ptitim are very similar to the Ashkenazi Jewish farfel, which was brought to Israel by Ashkenazi Jews from Europe beginning in the 1800s, and the two are often substituted for each other.The round shape of ptitim is reminiscent of the forms of Levantine 'pearl' couscous that pre-date it, and which are known as moghrabieh in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, or as maftoul in Palestinian cuisine. While moghrabieh and maftoul are produced by rolling dough between the palms or fingers, ptitim are formed by extrusion through a die in the same process as many other pastas, and the two are somewhat different in terms of taste and preparation.Ptitim are also similar to the Berber berkoukes  and the Sardinian fregula, but these, too, unlike ptitim, are rolled and coated products. Ptitim also resemble some products of the pastina family, in particular acini di pepe, orzo  and stellini. However, unlike pastina, the ptitim grains are pre-baked/toasted to give them their chewy texture and nutty flavor.
Israeli Couscous Recipes Archived 2014-07-13 at the Wayback Machine
Knödel  or Klöße  are boiled dumplings commonly found in Central European and East European cuisine. Countries in which their variant of Knödel is popular include Austria, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Bosnia, Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic. They are also found in Scandinavian, Romanian, northeastern Italian cuisine, Ukrainian, Belarusian and French  cuisines. Usually made from flour, bread or potatoes, they are often served as a side dish, but can also be a dessert such as plum dumplings, or even meat balls in soup. Many varieties and variations exist.
The word Knödel is German and is cognate with the English word knot and the Latin word nōdus 'knot'. Through the Old High German chnodo and the Middle High German knode it finally changed to the modern expression. Knödel in Hungary are called gombóc or knédli; in Slovenia, knedli or  cmoki; in the Czech Republic, knedlíky ; in Slovakia, knedle ; in Luxembourg, Kniddel; in Bosnia, Croatia, Poland and Serbia, knedle; in Bukovina, cnidle or cnigle; and, in Italy, canederli . In some regions of the United States, klub is used to refer specifically to potato dumplings. A similar dish is known in Sweden  and in Norway , filled with salty meat; and in Canada .
Knödel are used in various dishes in Austrian, German, Slovak and Czech cuisine. From these regions, Knödel spread throughout Europe.
Leberknödel are large dumplings made of ground liver and a batter made of bread soaked in milk and seasoned with nutmeg or other spices, boiled in beef stock and served as a soup.
Klöße are also large dumplings, steamed or boiled in hot water, made of dough from grated raw or mashed potatoes, eggs and flour. Similar semolina crack dumplings are made with semolina, egg and butter called Grießklößchen . Thüringer Klöße are made from raw or boiled potatoes, or a mixture of both, and are often filled with croutons or ham.
Bread dumplings  are made with dried white bread, milk and egg yolks . If bacon is added they are called Speckknödel.
Plum dumplings , popular over Central Europe, are large sweet dumplings made with flour and potato batter, by wrapping the potato dough around whole plums , boiled and rolled in hot buttered caramelized bread crumbs.
Dumplings made with quark cheese , traditionally topped with cinnamon sugar and served with apple sauce or with streusel.
In Brazil, German immigrants traditionally make Klöße with white rice, wheat flour and eggs, mixing them into a sturdy dough, shaping them in dumplings and boiling them.
Königsberger Klopse are, unlike regular dumplings, made from ground meat and are related to Frikadeller.
Frankenburger Bratknödel, are unique to the market town of Frankenburg am Hausruck and filled with a saucy meatball.
Matzah balls could be considered Knödel made from matzah meal. The Yiddish word for Matzah balls, קניידל , is cognate to Knödel. Matzah balls originated among Ashkenazi Jewish groups in Eastern or Central Europe.
Germknödel filled with spiced powidl, topped with sugar, poppy seeds and butter
Fercher, D.; Karrer, A. . Austrian Desserts and Pastries: 108 Classic Recipes. Skyhorse Publishing Company, Incorporated. p. 379. ISBN 978-1-62873-134-7.
The name derives from the Italian for oil lanterns.
Lanterne have deep ridges and are curved in a lantern shape.
Lasagna  is a type of pasta, possibly one of the oldest types, made of very wide, flat sheets. Either term can also refer to an Italian dish made of stacked layers of lasagna alternating with fillings such as ragù , béchamel sauce, vegetables, cheeses , and seasonings and spices. The dish may be topped with grated cheese, which becomes melted during baking. Typically cooked pasta is assembled with the other ingredients and then baked in an oven. The resulting baked pasta is cut into single-serving square or rectangular portions.
Lasagna originated in Italy during the Middle Ages. The oldest transcribed text about lasagna appears in 1282 in the Memoriali Bolognesi , in which lasagna was mentioned in a poem transcribed by a Bolognese notary; while the first recorded recipe was set down in the early 14th-century Liber de Coquina . It bore only a slight resemblance to the later traditional form of lasagna, featuring a fermented dough flattened into thin sheets, boiled, sprinkled with cheese and spices, and then eaten with a small pointed stick. Recipes written in the century following the Liber de Coquina recommended boiling the pasta in chicken broth and dressing it with cheese and chicken fat. In a recipe adapted for the Lenten fast, walnuts were recommended.
Mass-produced lasagne with a ruffled edge is called lasagna riccia, doppio festone, sciabò and sciablò.  In the Veneto, factory-produced lasagne are called bardele or lasagnoni.  Narrower lasagne are mezze lasagne, and if with a ruffled edge, mezze lasagne ricche.  Similar pastas are the narrower lasagnette and its longer cousin, the lasagnotte , as well as the sagne of Salento  and lagana in the remainder of Apulia.
The lasagna of Naples, lasagne di carnevale, is layered with local sausage, small fried meatballs, hard-boiled eggs, ricotta and mozzarella cheeses, and sauced with a Neapolitan ragù, a meat sauce.Lasagne al forno, layered with a thicker ragù and béchamel sauce and corresponding to the most common version of the dish outside Italy, is traditionally associated with the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy. Here, and especially in its capital, Bologna, layers of lasagna are traditionally green  and served with ragù , bechamel and Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.
In other regions, lasagna can be made with various combinations of ricotta or mozzarella cheese, tomato sauce, meats , and vegetables , and the dish is typically flavoured with wine, garlic, onion, and oregano. In all cases, the lasagne are baked .
Traditionally pasta dough prepared in Southern Italy used semolina and water; in the northern regions, where semolina was not available, flour and eggs were used. In modern Italy, since the only type of wheat allowed for commercially sold pasta is durum wheat, industrial lasagna are made of semolina from durum wheat. Nonetheless, in the north and especially in Emilia-Romagna, the tradition of egg-based dough remains popular for artisanal and homemade productions.
In Ancient Rome, there was a dish similar to a traditional lasagna called lasana or lasanum  described in the book De re coquinaria by Marcus Gavius Apicius, but the word could have a more ancient origin. The first theory is that lasagna comes from Greek λάγανον , a flat sheet of pasta dough cut into strips. The word λαγάνα  is still used in Greek to mean a flat thin type of unleavened bread baked for the holiday Clean Monday.
Another theory is that the word lasagna comes from the Greek λάσανα  or λάσανον  meaning 'trivet', 'stand for a pot' or 'chamber pot'. The Romans borrowed the word as lasanum, meaning 'cooking pot'. The Italians used the word to refer to the cookware in which lasagna is made. Later the food took on the name of the serving dish.
Another proposed link or reference is the 14th-century English dish loseyn as described in The Forme of Cury, a cookbook prepared by "the chief Master Cooks of King Richard II", which included English recipes as well as dishes influenced by Spanish, French, Italian, and Arab cuisines. This dish has similarities to modern lasagna in both its recipe, which features a layering of ingredients between pasta sheets, and its name. An important difference is the lack of tomatoes, which did not arrive in Europe until after Columbus reached the Americas in 1492. The earliest discussion of the tomato in European literature appeared in a herbal written in 1544 by Pietro Andrea Mattioli, while the earliest cookbook found with tomato recipes was published in Naples in 1692, but the author had obtained these recipes from Spanish sources.As with most other types of pasta, the Italian word is a plural form: lasagne meaning more than one sheet of lasagna, though, in many other languages, a derivative of the singular word lasagna is used for the popular baked pasta dish. When referring to the baked dish, regional usage in Italy favours the plural form lasagne in the north of the country and the singular lasagna in the south. The former plural usage has influenced the usual spelling found in British English, while the southern Italian singular usage has influenced the spelling often used in American English.  Both lasagne and lasagna are used as singular non-count  nouns in English.
Baked ziti – a baked Italian dish with macaroni and sauce
Crozets de Savoie – a type of small, square-shaped pasta made in the Savoie region in France
King Ranch chicken – a casserole also known as "Texas Lasagna"
Lasagna cell – inadvertent corrosion caused by improper storage of lasagna
Lazanki – a type of small square- or rectangle-shaped pasta made in Poland and Belarus
Moussaka – a Mediterranean casserole that is layered in some recipes
Oreilles d'âne – a French Alpine casserole made of lasagna and wild spinach
Pastelón – a baked, layered Puerto Rican dish made with plantains
Sagon, Candy . "The Americanization Of Lasagna". The Washington Post. p. F01. Retrieved 24 November 2021.
Lasagnette  is a type of ribbon pasta and a shorter version of lasagnotte. Characteristics of lasagnette differ based on the form of their edges. Different kinds could have edges with a waved cut on both sides, straight cut edges on both side, or a variation including one side with a straight cut and the other with a waved cut. Lasagnette can be prepared in various forms; the two most popular involve a thinner version of the traditional layered Italian lasagna. The second version combines ingredients of the recipe with the pasta, and is served tossed on a plate.
Lasagnotte is a flat and wide pasta noodle. It is essentially a longer version of lasagnette.
Linguine  is a type of Italian pasta similar to fettuccine and trenette but elliptical in section rather than flat. It is about 4 millimetres  in width, which is wider than spaghetti but not as wide as fettuccine. The name linguine means "little tongues" in Italian, where it is a plural of the feminine linguina. A thinner version of linguine is called linguettine. Linguine was traditionally served with sauces such as pesto but others such as tomato or fish based sauces are popular as well. Linguine is typically available in both white flour and whole-wheat versions but was originally made with durum wheat. Linguine originated in Italy and is based on more traditional pastas. It is a type of pasta that finds its origin in Genoa. In the United States, National Linguine Day occurs on September 15 every year.
Lorighittas  are a type of pasta typical of the village of Morgongiori at the foot of Monte Arci in Sardinia. They are recognized as a traditional food and thus carry the P.A.T. label in Italy.They are typically seasoned with free-range chicken and tomato sauce or with simple tomato sauce.
They are prepared by hand by twisting a double string of dough between the fingers to create a closed braid to form a ring .
They were traditionally prepared for the feast of All Saints Day with semolina flour and water. To make a kilo of pasta a person alone can take 3/4 hours.
In recent years, successive municipalities have adopted policies to promote lorighittas. They have been represented at various important exhibitions and fairs, including the Terra Madre Salone del Gusto and the festive salon in Lugano. In addition, for more than ten years, the city administration has been organizing the Lorighittas festival in the first week of August with a free tasting of the famous pasta. This event has always been a great success with thousands of people who live in a small town at the foot of Monte Arci.
Macaroni  is dry pasta shaped like narrow tubes.   Made with durum wheat, macaroni is commonly cut in short lengths; curved macaroni may be referred to as elbow macaroni. Some home machines can make macaroni shapes but, like most pasta, macaroni is usually made commercially by large-scale extrusion. The curved shape is created by different speeds of extrusion on opposite sides of the pasta tube as it comes out of the machine.
The word "macaroni" is often used synonymously with elbow-shaped macaroni, as it is the variety most often used in macaroni and cheese recipes. In Italy and other countries, the noun maccheroni can refer to straight, tubular, square-ended pasta corta  or to long pasta dishes, as in maccheroni alla chitarra and frittata di maccheroni, which are prepared with long pasta like spaghetti.
In the United States, federal regulations define three different shapes of dried pasta, such as spaghetti, as a "macaroni product".
In Italian, maccheroni refers to elongated pasta, not necessarily in tubular form. This general meaning is still retained outside Rome and in different languages which borrowed the word. 
Maccheroni comes from Italian maccheroni , plural form of maccherone. The term derives from the ancient Greek "Macaria". The academic consensus supports that the word is derived from the Greek μακαρία , a kind of barley broth which was served to commemorate the dead. In turn, that comes from μάκαρες  meaning the "blessed ones, blessed dead", the plural of μάκαρ  which means "blessed, happy"; μακάριος  + -ιος ) and Μακάριος  "Makarios  are derived terms. The many varieties sometimes differ from each other because of the texture of each pasta: rigatoni and tortiglioni, for example, have ridges down their lengths, while chifferi, lumache, lumaconi, pipe, pipette, etc. refer to elbow-shaped pasta similar to macaroni in North American culture.
However, the Italian linguist G. Alessio argues that the word can have two origins. The first is the Medieval Greek μακαρώνεια  "dirge" , which would mean "funeral meal" and then "food to serve" during this office  - macharōnia in the sense of "rice-based dish served at the funeral"), in which case, the term would be composed of the double root of μακάριος  "blessed" and αἰωνίως  "eternally". The second is the Greek μακαρία  "barley broth", which would have added the suffix -one.In his book Delizia! The Epic History of Italians and their Food , John Dickie instead says that the word macaroni, and its earlier variants like maccheroni, "comes from maccare, meaning to pound or crush."
The word first appears in English as makerouns in the 1390 Forme of Cury, which records the earliest recipe for macaroni and cheese. The word later came to be applied to overdressed dandies and was associated with foppish Italian fashions of dress and periwigs, as in the eighteenth-century British song "Yankee Doodle".
As is the case with dishes made with other types of pasta, macaroni and cheese is a popular dish and is often made with elbow macaroni. The same dish, known simply as macaroni cheese, is also found in Great Britain, where it originated. In Great Britain, particularly Scotland, macaroni cheese is a popular filling for pies, often consumed as a takeaway food or at football grounds. A sweet macaroni, known as macaroni pudding, containing milk and sugar  was also popular with the British during the Victorian era.  A popular canned variety is still manufactured by Ambrosia and sold in UK supermarkets.In areas with large populations open to Western cultural influence such as Hong Kong, Macao, Malaysia and Singapore, the local Chinese have adopted macaroni as an ingredient for Chinese-style Western cuisine. In Hong Kong's cha chaan teng  and Southeast Asia's kopi tiam , macaroni is cooked in water and then rinsed to remove starch, and served in clear broth with ham or frankfurter sausages, peas, black mushrooms, and optionally eggs, reminiscent of noodle soup dishes. This is often a course for breakfast or light lunch fare. Macaroni has also been incorporated into Malay Malaysian cuisine, where it is stir-fried akin to mee goreng using Asian seasoning similar to said noodle dish . In the Philippines, it is a key ingredient in sopas, a semi-clear chicken broth often with chicken meat, pork, carrots, and other vegetables. A common variant uses milk, specifically evaporada.
Kushari – an Egyptian dish made of rice, macaroni and lentils
Maccheroni alla molinara  or alla mugnaia   is an uneven, long and thick fresh pasta that is hand-pulled to a diameter of about 4–6 mm.
It is made using only water and durum wheat flour. The name literally translates to "the miller’s wife’s pasta". The pasta is characteristic of the province of Teramo and Pescara in the Abruzzo, Italy.These are manufactured by working the dough until it gets a hole in its center. The process requires trained hands that, facing one another, are able to slip into the hole to knead the dough in a circle, and gradually lengthening the ring to get a long noodle. This is then cut to length, generally about twice as long as a normal spaghetti, or served as one giant noodle loop with up to 10 meters in length.This pasta remains relatively unknown since it is typically served only in homes and at festivals, and it represents a dying trait even in Abruzzo.
The history of this pasta dates back to the 14th century coinciding with the construction of watermills on the river Fino. Back then it was presented to King Robert of Naples when he visited the area.
Mafaldine, also known as reginette  or simply mafalda or mafalde, is a type of ribbon-shaped pasta.
It comes from the Naples area where they were once called "fettuccelle ricce". Mafaldine were named in honor of the birth of Princess Mafalda of Savoy .Mafaldine is prepared similarly to other ribbon-based pasta such as linguine and fettuccine. It is flat and wide, usually about 1 cm  in width, with wavy edges on both sides with a curl at the ends that remains well defined even after cooking.
Tripoline  is a type of ribbon pasta noodles, similar to mafaldine. It is a thick ribbon ridged on one side, and is often found in baked pasta dishes. 
It is believed that this pasta shape originated in the Campania region, where according to popular tradition, it was created in Naples in honour of King Victor Emmanuel II.
In the 1930s, Fascist Italy celebrated its colonial empire by creating new forms of pasta reminiscent of its African possessions: tripoline , bengazine , assabesi  and abissine .
Malloreddus, sometimes Italianized as gnocchetti sardi, are a type of pasta typical of Sardinian cuisine. They have the shape of thin ribbed shells, about 2 cm  long, and are made of semolina flour and water. They are usually eaten with different sauces
Malloreddus are typical of the area of Medio Campidano , but correspond to equivalent types of pasta, made with similar techniques, but in smaller sizes, in other parts of Sardinia and also known as "macarrones de punzu", cigiones, macarones caidos, cravaos.Cassulli from Carloforte  can be reminiscent of malloreddus. Cassulli, in Sardinia, are found in the archipelago of Sulcis.
The term malloreddu  could derive from the Latin mallolus, which means "trunk of dough", dumpling. A second possible etymology would make the name derive from a diminutive of the word malloru, which in Sardinian campidanese  means bull. Consequently, malloreddus means little calves.
Malloreddus have always been the most prepared traditional dish in Sardinia in all the most important occasions, both in festivals and village fairs, and during weddings. Since ancient times housewives have prepared this type of pasta. The origin is to be found in the millenary scheme of the peasant cultivation-alimentation in the Mediterranean area, mainly based on the cultivation of wheat.
The manual processing of malloreddus in the home was done by mixing durum wheat semolina with water, and rolled up strips of pasta about 15 cm  long, which were cut into cubes. Then the shape was obtained by pressing the cubes of dough against the end of a straw basket, called su ciuliri  in order to get them striped, or to have them smooth it was enough to simply press them against a wooden base. The result was a pot-bellied product that in the imagination of the agro-pastoral world took the form of small calves.
The classic dish of Sardinian cuisine is malloreddus alla campidanese. In this dish, a ragú is made by cutting Sardinian sausage into small pieces; the pieces are fried in oil with chopped onion, then boiled for about an hour with tomato sauce; a few strands of saffron are then added, ten minutes before the end of cooking. The boiled gnocchetti are seasoned with this sauce and grated Sardinian pecorino cheese. Originally saffron was used directly in the dough of malloreddus, now instead it is added at the end together with the sauce.
Il Libro di cucina di Wikibooks contiene ricette relative a questo argomento
Maltagliati  are a type of pasta product typical to the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy.
In the manufacture of pasta such as tagliatelle, dough is rolled and then cut into thin strips, producing noodles. The excess parts of the dough, generally the edges, are left with irregular shape and thickness, therefore "poorly cut" or in Italian, maltagliati.  Maltagliati are therefore cut from such scrap pieces of pasta, and differ in shape, size and thickness.As probable food for the poor, recipes for maltagliati generally call for simple, inexpensive ingredients. The most classic use of maltagliati is in bean soup, but there are several other recipes involving them.
Modern matlagliati show a close resemblance to those known from literary sources of ancient Roman and Greek times. This could be a hint of their origin.
A mandala  is a geometric configuration of symbols. In various spiritual traditions, mandalas may be employed for focusing attention of practitioners and adepts, as a spiritual guidance tool, for establishing a sacred space and as an aid to meditation and trance induction. In the Eastern religions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Shinto it is used as a map representing deities, or especially in the case of Shinto, paradises, kami or actual shrines. A mandala generally represents the spiritual journey, starting from outside to the inner core, through layers.
In Hinduism, a basic mandala, also called a yantra, takes the form of a square with four gates containing a circle with a center point. Each gate is in the general shape of a T. Mandalas often have radial balance.A yantra is similar to a mandala, usually smaller and using a more limited colour palette. It may be a two- or three-dimensional geometric composition used in sadhanas, puja or meditative rituals, and may incorporate a mantra into its design. It is considered to represent the abode of the deity. Each yantra is unique and calls the deity into the presence of the practitioner through the elaborate symbolic geometric designs. According to one scholar, "Yantras function as revelatory symbols of cosmic truths and as instructional charts of the spiritual aspect of human experience"Many situate yantras as central focus points for Hindu tantric practice. Yantras are not representations, but are lived, experiential, nondual realities. As Khanna describes:
Despite its cosmic meanings a yantra is a reality lived. Because of the relationship that exists in the Tantras between the outer world  and man's inner world , every symbol in a yantra is ambivalently resonant in inner–outer synthesis, and is associated with the subtle body and aspects of human consciousness.
The term 'mandala' appears in the Rigveda as the name of the sections of the work, and Vedic rituals use mandalas such as the Navagraha mandala to this day.
In Vajrayana Buddhism, mandalas have been developed also into sandpainting. They are also a key part of Anuttarayoga Tantra meditation practices.
The man mandala can be shown to represent in visual form the core essence of the Vajrayana teachings. The mandala represents the nature of the Pure Land, Enlightened mind.
An example of this type of mandala is Vajrabhairava mandala a silk tapestry woven with gilded paper depicting lavish elements like crowns and jewelry, which gives a three-dimensional effect to the piece.
A mandala can also represent the entire universe, which is traditionally depicted with Mount Meru as the axis mundi in the center, surrounded by the continents. One example is the Cosmological Mandala with Mount Meru, a silk tapestry from the Yuan dynasty that serves as a diagram of the Tibetan cosmology, which was given to China from Nepal and Tibet.
In the mandala, the outer circle of fire usually symbolises wisdom. The ring of eight charnel grounds represents the Buddhist exhortation to be always mindful of death, and the impermanence with which samsara is suffused: "such locations were utilized in order to confront and to realize the transient nature of life". Described elsewhere: "within a flaming rainbow nimbus and encircled by a black ring of dorjes, the major outer ring depicts the eight great charnel grounds, to emphasize the dangerous nature of human life". Inside these rings lie the walls of the mandala palace itself, specifically a place populated by deities and Buddhas.
One well-known type of mandala is the mandala of the "Five Buddhas", archetypal Buddha forms embodying various aspects of enlightenment. Such Buddhas are depicted depending on the school of Buddhism, and even the specific purpose of the mandala. A common mandala of this type is that of the Five Wisdom Buddhas , the Buddhas Vairocana, Aksobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. When paired with another mandala depicting the Five Wisdom Kings, this forms the Mandala of the Two Realms.
Mandalas are commonly used by tantric Buddhists as an aid to meditation.
The mandala is "a support for the meditating person", something to be repeatedly contemplated to the point of saturation, such that the image of the mandala becomes fully internalised in even the minutest detail and can then be summoned and contemplated at will as a clear and vivid visualized image. With every mandala comes what Tucci calls "its associated liturgy ... contained in texts known as tantras", instructing practitioners on how the mandala should be drawn, built and visualised, and indicating the mantras to be recited during its ritual use.
By visualizing "pure lands", one learns to understand experience itself as pure, and as the abode of enlightenment. The protection that we need, in this view, is from our own minds, as much as from external sources of confusion. In many tantric mandalas, this aspect of separation and protection from the outer samsaric world is depicted by "the four outer circles: the purifying fire of wisdom, the vajra circle, the circle with the eight tombs, the lotus circle". The ring of vajras forms a connected fence-like arrangement running around the perimeter of the outer mandala circle.As a meditation on impermanence , after days or weeks of creating the intricate pattern of a sand mandala, the sand is brushed together into a pile and spilled into a body of running water to spread the blessings of the mandala.
Kværne in his extended discussion of sahaja, discusses the relationship of sadhana interiority and exteriority in relation to mandala thus:
...external ritual and internal sadhana form an indistinguishable whole, and this unity finds its most pregnant expression in the form of the mandala, the sacred enclosure consisting of concentric squares and circles drawn on the ground and representing that adamant plane of being on which the aspirant to Buddha hood wishes to establish himself. The unfolding of the tantric ritual depends on the mandala; and where a material mandala is not employed, the adept proceeds to construct one mentally in the course of his meditation."
A "mandala offering" in Tibetan Buddhism is a symbolic offering of the entire universe. Every intricate detail of these mandalas is fixed in the tradition and has specific symbolic meanings, often on more than one level.
Whereas the above mandala represents the pure surroundings of a Buddha, this mandala represents the universe. This type of mandala is used for the mandala-offerings, during which one symbolically offers the universe to the Buddhas or to one's teacher. Within Vajrayana practice, 100,000 of these mandala offerings  can be part of the preliminary practices before a student even begins actual tantric practices. This mandala is generally structured according to the model of the universe as taught in a Buddhist classic text the Abhidharma-kośa, with Mount Meru at the centre, surrounded by the continents, oceans and mountains, etc.
Various Mandalas are described in many Pali Buddhist texts. Some of the examples of the Theravada Buddhist Mandalas are:
Mandala of Eight Disciples of Buddha describing the Shakyamuni Buddha at center and Eight great disciple in eight major directions.Mandala of Buddhas is the mandala consisting of nine major Buddhas of the past and the present Gautama Buddha occupying the ten directions.Mandala of Eight Devis includes the eight Devis occupying and protecting the eight corners of the Universe.In Sigālovāda Sutta, Buddha describes the relationships of a common lay persons in Mandala style.
One Japanese branch of Mahayana Buddhism – Shingon Buddhism – makes frequent use of mandalas in its rituals as well, though the actual mandalas differ. When Shingon's founder, Kukai, returned from his training in China, he brought back two mandalas that became central to Shingon ritual: the Mandala of the Womb Realm and the Mandala of the Diamond Realm.
These two mandalas are engaged in the abhiseka initiation rituals for new Shingon students, more commonly known as the Kechien Kanjō . A common feature of this ritual is to blindfold the new initiate and to have them throw a flower upon either mandala. Where the flower lands assists in the determination of which tutelary deity the initiate should follow.
Sand mandalas, as found in Tibetan Buddhism, are not practiced in Shingon Buddhism.
The mandala in Nichiren Buddhism is a moji-mandala , which is a paper hanging scroll or wooden tablet whose inscription consists of Chinese characters and medieval-Sanskrit script representing elements of the Buddha's enlightenment, protective Buddhist deities, and certain Buddhist concepts. Called the Gohonzon, it was originally inscribed by Nichiren, the founder of this branch of Japanese Buddhism, during the late 13th Century. The Gohonzon is the primary object of veneration in some Nichiren schools and the only one in others, which consider it to be the supreme object of worship as the embodiment of the supreme Dharma and Nichiren's inner enlightenment. The seven characters Namu Myōhō Renge Kyō, considered to be the name of the supreme Dharma, as well as the invocation that believers chant, are written down the center of all Nichiren-sect Gohonzons, whose appearance may otherwise vary depending on the particular school and other factors.
Mandalas have sometimes been used in Pure Land Buddhism to graphically represent Pure Lands, based on descriptions found in the Larger Sutra and the Contemplation Sutra. The most famous mandala in Japan is the Taima mandala, dated to about 763 CE. The Taima mandala is based on the Contemplation Sutra, but other similar mandalas have been made subsequently. Unlike mandalas used in Vajrayana Buddhism, it is not used as an object of meditation or for esoteric ritual. Instead, it provides a visual representation of the Pure Land texts, and is used as a teaching aid.Also in Jodo Shinshu Buddhism, Shinran and his descendant, Rennyo, sought a way to create easily accessible objects of reverence for the lower-classes of Japanese society. Shinran designed a mandala using a hanging scroll, and the words of the nembutsu  written vertically. This style of mandala is still used by some Jodo Shinshu Buddhists in home altars, or butsudan.
Bodhimaṇḍala is a term in Buddhism that means "circle of awakening".
Sand mandalas are colorful mandalas made from sand that are ritualistically destroyed. They originated in India in the 8th-12th century but are now practiced in Tibetan Buddhism. Each mandala is dedicated to specific deities. In Buddhism Deities represent states of the mind to be obtained on the path to enlightenment, the mandala itself is representative of the deities palace which also represents the mind of the deity. Each mandala is a pictorial representation of a tantra. for the process of making Sand mandalas they are created by monks that have trained for 3-5 years in a monastery. These sand mandalas are made to be destroyed to symbolize impermanence, the Buddhist belief that death is not the end, and that one's essence will always return to the elements. It is also related to the belief that one should not become attached to anything. To create these mandalas, the monks first create a sketch, then take colorful sand traditionally made from powdered stones and gems into copper funnels called Cornetts and gently tap sand out of them to create the sand mandala. Each color represents attributes of deities. While making the mandalas the monks will pray and meditate, each grain of sand represents a blessing. Monks will travel to demonstrate this art form to people, often in museums.
The Maya civilization tended to present calendars in a form similar to a mandala. It is similar in form and function to the Kalachakra  sand paintings of Tibetan Buddhists. Maya symbolism was later used in the Dreamspell calendar, developed by José Argüelles. Sometimes described as an authentic Mayan mandala, it is "inspired by" elements of the 260-day Tzolk'in calendar .
The Sun Stone is thought to be a ceremonial representation of the entire universe as seen by the Aztec religious class, in some ways resembling a mandala.
The earliest interpretations of the stone relate to its use as a calendar. In 1792, two years after the stone's unearthing, Mexican anthropologist Antonio de León y Gama wrote a treatise on the Aztec calendar using the stone as its basis. Some of the circles of glyphs are the glyphs for the days of the month. The four symbols included in the Ollin glyph represent the four past suns that the Mexica believed the earth had passed through.Another aspect of the stone is its religious significance. One theory is that the face at the center of the stone represents Tonatiuh, the Aztec deity of the sun; it is for this reason that the stone became known as the "Sun Stone." Richard Townsend proposed a different theory, claiming that the figure at the center of the stone represents Tlaltecuhtli, the Mexica earth deity who features in Mexica creation myths. Modern archaeologists, such as those at the National Anthropology Museum in Mexico City, believe it is more likely to have been used primarily as a ceremonial basin or ritual altar for gladiatorial sacrifices than as an astrological or astronomical reference.Yet another characteristic of the stone is its possible geographic significance. The four points may relate to the four corners of the earth or the cardinal points. The inner circles may express space as well as time.Lastly, there is the political aspect of the stone. It may have been intended to show Tenochtitlan as the center of the world and therefore, as the center of authority. Townsend argues in favor of this idea, claiming that the small glyphs of additional dates amongst the four previous suns - 1 Flint , 1 Rain , and 7 Monkey  – represent matters of historical importance to the Mexica state. He posits, for example, that 7 Monkey represents the significant day for the cult of a community within Tenochtitlan. His claim is further supported by the presence of Mexica ruler Moctezuma II's name on the work.
The Cosmati pavements, including that at Westminster Abbey, are geometric supposedly mandala-like mosaic designs from thirteenth century Italy. The Great Pavement at Westminster Abbey is believed to embody divine and cosmic geometries as the seat of enthronement of the monarchs of England.Similarly, many of the Illuminations of Hildegard von Bingen can be used as mandalas, as well as many of the images of esoteric Christianity, as in Christian Hermeticism, Christian Alchemy, and Rosicrucianism.
Alchemist, mathematician and astrologer John Dee developed a geometric symbol which he called the Sigillum Dei  manifesting a universal geometric order which incorporated the names of the archangels, derived from earlier forms of the clavicula salomonis or key of Solomon.
The Layer Monument, an early 17th-century marble mural funerary monument at the Church of Saint John the Baptist, Maddermarket, Norwich, is a rare example of Christian iconography absorbing alchemical symbolism to create a mandala in Western funerary art.
The re-introduction of mandalas into modern Western thought is largely credited to psychologist Carl Gustav Jung. In his exploration of the unconscious through art, Jung observed the common appearance of a circle motif across religions and cultures. He hypothesized that the circle drawings reflected the mind's inner state at the moment of creation and were a kind of symbolic archetype in the collective unconscious. Familiarity with the philosophical writings of India prompted Jung to adopt the word "mandala" to describe these drawings created by himself and his patients. In his autobiography, Jung wrote:
I sketched every morning in a notebook a small circular drawing,  which seemed to correspond to my inner situation at the time.  Only gradually did I discover what the mandala really is:  the Self, the wholeness of the personality, which if all goes well is harmonious.
Jung claimed that the urge to make mandalas emerges during moments of intense personal growth. He further hypothesized their appearance indicated a "profound re-balancing process" is underway in the psyche; the result of the process would be a more complex and better integrated personality. 
The mandala serves a conservative purpose – namely, to restore a previously existing order. But it also serves the creative purpose of giving expression and form to something that does not yet exist, something new and unique.  The process is that of the ascending spiral, which grows upward while simultaneously returning again and again to the same point.
American art therapist Joan Kellogg later created the MARI card test, a free response measure, based on Jung's work.Transpersonal psychologist David Fontana proposed that the symbolic nature of a mandala may help one "to access progressively deeper levels of the unconscious, ultimately assisting the meditator to experience a mystical sense of oneness with the ultimate unity from which the cosmos in all its manifold forms arises."
Buddhist architecture often applied mandala as the blueprint or plan to design Buddhist structures, including temple complex and stupas. A notable example of mandala in architecture is the 9th century Borobudur in Central Java, Indonesia. It is built as a large stupa surrounded by smaller ones arranged on terraces formed as a stepped pyramid, and when viewed from above, takes the form of a giant tantric Buddhist mandala, simultaneously representing the Buddhist cosmology and the nature of mind. Other temples from the same period that also have mandala plans include Sewu, Plaosan and Prambanan. Similar mandala designs are also observable in Cambodia, Thailand and Myanmar.
Circular diagrams are often used in phylogenetics, especially for the graphical representation of phylogenetic relationships. Evolutionary trees often encompass numerous species that are conveniently shown on a circular tree, with images of the species shown on the periphery of a tree. Such diagrams have been called phylogenetic mandalas.
Mandala as an art form first appeared in Buddhist art that were produced in India during the first century B.C.E. These can also be seen in Rangoli designs in Indian households.
In New Age, the mandala is a diagram, chart or geometric pattern that represents the cosmos metaphysically or symbolically; a time-microcosm of the universe, but it originally meant to represent wholeness and a model for the organizational structure of life itself, a cosmic diagram that shows the relation to the infinite and the world that extends beyond and within various minds & bodies.
One of the most intense archaeological discoveries in recent years that could redefine the history of eastern thought and tradition of mandala is the discovery of five giant mandalas in the valley of Manipur, India, made with Google Earth imagery. Located in the paddy field in the west of Imphal, the capital of Manipur, the Maklang geoglyph is perhaps the world's largest mandala built entirely of mud. The site wasn't discovered until 2013 as its whole structure could only be visible via Google Earth satellite imagery. The whole paddy field, locally known as Bihu Loukon, is now protected and announced as historical monument and site by the government of Manipur in the same year. The site is situated 12 km aerial distance from Kangla with the GPS coordinates of 24° 48' N and 93° 49' E. It covers a total area of around 224,161.45 square meters. This square mandala has four similar protruding rectangular ‘gates’ in the cardinal directions guarded each by similar but smaller rectangular ‘gates’ on the left and right. Within the square there is an eight petalled flower or rayed-star, recently called as Maklang ‘Star fort’ by the locals, in the centre covering a total area of around 50,836.66 square meters. The discovery of other five giant mandalas in the valley of Manipur is also made with Google Earth. The five giant mandalas, viz., Sekmai mandala, Heikakmapal mandala, Phurju twin mandalas and Sangolmang mandala are located on the western bank of the Iril River.  Another two fairly large mandala shaped geoglyph at Nongren and Keinou are also reported from Manipur valley, India, in 2019. They are named as Nongren mandala and Keinou mandala.
The Rajamandala  was formulated by the Indian author Kautilya in his work on politics, the Arthashastra . It describes circles of friendly and enemy states surrounding the king's state.In historical, social and political sense, the term "mandala" is also employed to denote traditional Southeast Asian political formations . It was adopted by 20th century Western historians from ancient Indian political discourse as a means of avoiding the term 'state' in the conventional sense. Not only did Southeast Asian polities not conform to Chinese and European views of a territorially defined state with fixed borders and a bureaucratic apparatus, but they diverged considerably in the opposite direction: the polity was defined by its centre rather than its boundaries, and it could be composed of numerous other tributary polities without undergoing administrative integration. Empires such as Bagan, Ayutthaya, Champa, Khmer, Srivijaya and Majapahit are known as "mandala" in this sense.
Fashion designer Mandali Mendrilla designed an interactive art installation called Mandala of Desires  made in peace silk and eco friendly textile ink, displayed at the China Art Museum in Shanghai in November 2015. The pattern of the dress was based on the Goloka Yantra mandala, shaped as a lotus with eight petals. Visitors were invited to place a wish on the sculpture dress, which will be taken to India and offered to a genuine living Wish Tree.
Grotenhuis, Elizabeth Ten . Japanese mandalas: representations of sacred geography, Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press
Kossak, S. . Sacred visions: early paintings from central Tibet. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
Mandalas in the Tradition of the Dalai Lamas' Namgyal Monastery by Losang Samten
Mezzani mˈzaŋ]) is a comune  in the Province of Parma in the Italian region Emilia-Romagna, located about 90 kilometres  northwest of Bologna and about 15 kilometres  northeast of Parma. The principal centres of the municipality are Casale, Mezzano Rondani, Mezzano Inferiore, Mezzano Superiore, whereas Bocca d’Enza, Ghiare Bonvisi, Valle are only hamlets.
Mezzani borders the following municipalities: Brescello, Casalmaggiore, Colorno, Parma, Sorbolo, Torrile, Viadana.
Mezzani lies on the northeastern end of the province of Parma, in the middle of Po valley and borders with three provinces: Reggio Emilia, Mantua, Cremona.
Located on the right shore of the Po River, the municipal territory is crossed by others watercourses too: the torrent Parma on the west, that flows into Po near Mezzano Superiore, the torrent Enza that follows for some kilometres the eastern border with the Reggio Emilia, the Parmetta canal southwards of Mezzano Inferiore and the Parma morta abandoned riverbed of Parma torrent that up to the first years of 19th century flowed into Enza.
Mezzani is located in the lowest area of Po valley called Bassa.
The toponym Mezzani comes from Latin word  medianus,  meaning "in the middle of", once used to name islands on river Po. This territory originated largely from these islands in medieval times and it was continuously reshaped from river waters. Therefore signs of ancient settlements were not found here, but not far from municipality’s boundaries in Cogozzo  not far from Viadana and near Coenzo were found traces of two Bronze Age villages called terramare. The southern part of the territory still shows the signs of Roman centuriation.
Casale, the oldest inhabited centre, was founded on a river island; in 890 it was defined as "insula iuxta Padum"  to become some century later "Casalis Ripae Padi"  because the river moved northwards. The ancient river presence is testified from the toponym Valle  located southwards.Since their formation as islands of Po river, Mezzano Inferiore and Superiore where possession of Parma's Bishop. Some ancient documents talk about alluvial lands near river Po owned from the Bishop after concession of Holy Roman Emperors Charles III the Fat in 973 and Henry VI in 1195. Abbot Giovanni Romani mentioned an event which happened near the "Mezzano del Vescovo" in 1131. The above-mentioned centres originated in different periods: the first one was Mezzano Superiore, the other certainly after 1306. 
Mezzano Inferiore become autonomous from Mezzano Superiore in the early 16th century with the construction of a parochial church, rebuilt in 1563 and finished in 1779.
Mezzano Rondani was founded on the Lombard bank of Po. After a big flood that interested the area from Casalmaggiore to Fossacaprara and moved northwards the river course, the place became an island and then was joined to Parmesan bank. The word Rondani comes from the surname of a rich family owner of many possessions in that area.
Mezzano Rondani and Casale were parts of the Duchy of Parma, while Mezzano Inferiore and Superiore were since the origins fiefs of the bishops of Parma, and for that reason their ancient names had the suffix del Vescovo .  They formed an independent state, where the Bishop had also his palace and a garrison.It was always a rural district, but due to its closeness to Lombard and the Modenese states was also interested from smuggling. In various times it became a battlefield: a field is still called "Turkish cemetery" because in it were buried the corpses of Turkish mercenaries that fought for the Republic of Venice against the Duchy of Milan. In 1634 the Germans stationed in Castelnovo di Sotto raided and burned the church of Mezzano Inferiore and devastated the village. Some old memoirs talk about the battle of Colorno of 1734 for Mantua succession but in fact it took place in Mezzano Inferiore: some cannonballs still lie on the bell tower.
After various attempts in 1763 the dukes of Parma succeeded in forcing Parma’s Bishop to renounce his possessions in Mezzani. With this act the two villages passed under the jurisdiction of the duchy of Parma. The loss of autonomy and privileges granted till that event, the new taxes introduced from Parma caused a revolt against duke Filippo Borbone. The duke repressed the rebellion by sending his dragoons that burned 75 houses and confiscated the properties of 75 families.In 1861 Mezzani with Duchy of Parma became part of the Kingdom of Italy.
Mezzani was decorated with the Bronze Medal for Military Valour for its participation in the Italian resistance movement during World War II.
S. Maria nascente The parish church of Mezzano Inferiore was built a first time in 1563 and then rebuilt between 1754 and 1779 on a plan of Bettoli on the same foundation. Inside there is an organ of Giovanni and Stefano Cavalletti of 1829 and a characteristic high altar in inlaid marble .
Beata Vergine delle Grazie   This oratory has a rectangular plan with concave moulding and bell tower with cusp roof. In the interior the vault is with crossed webs.
S. Silvestro  Appears in the bull of Lucius II of March 1144, as a property of the monastery of Saint Giovanni:  “Ecclesia Sancti Silvestri de insula". Afterwards it was reconstructed on the same place; today still remain some traces of the old medieval church.
S. Michele  The first church was built in the 12th century, as testify the apsidal foundations. It was probably reconstructed in 1479, year of consecration of Bishop Sagramoro Sagramori, and relocated frontward. The bell tower was raised in 1664 from its massive Renaissance structure. The front style shows an origin datable at the end of the 17th century.
Bishop's palace . Now a private property, it was never finished, but according to some drawings of the 16th century it was to become magnificent.
Oriented reserve Parma Morta. It is located around the old course of Parma river. Here can be found the typical vegetation of stagnant waters; shrubby and forest vegetation consists of hygrophilous shrubs of willow and alder and mesophyll woods of oak, maple, cornel, wild cherry and elm. The nesting birdlife can be divided in species that prefer the reed thicket and those linked to the residual arboreal riparian strip.
Aquarium. In the reserve is an interesting didactic aquarium containing the river ichthyic species more typical: carps, tenches, perches, catfishes, sturgeons, crayfishes are only some of the species that can be observed and experience.
The New World Pasta Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ebro Foods,  
was a retail branded pasta manufacturer in North America. 
New World Pasta headquarters was in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. The company was formed in 1999 when  the Hershey Company's pasta business was divested to a private equity group. After its formation, New World Pasta acquired the four remaining brands of Borden's pasta business in July 2001 that the American Italian Pasta Company had not purchased a month earlier . New World Pasta declared bankruptcy in 2004. 
In 2006 it was acquired by Ebro Puleva S.A., a food company based in Spain.As part of Ebro Puleva, New World Pasta acquired Strom Products in 2012, including the No Yolks and Wacky Mac brands.Effective January 1, 2017, American Rice, Inc., and New World Pasta Company merged into Riviana Foods Inc.On November 5, 2020, it was announced that the American Beauty, Creamette, Light 'n Fluffy, No Yolks, Prince, San Giorgio, Skinner, and Wacky Mac brands would be sold to TreeHouse Foods.  This was followed by the sale of the Catelli and Lancia brands to Barilla on February 1, 2021, and the flagship Ronzoni brand to Post Holdings on March 30, 2021.
Ronzoni - The flagship brand of New World Pasta, available in Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South Carolina, and Washington.
American Beauty - Available in Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
Creamette - Available in Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.  Acquired from Borden in 2001.Light 'n Fluffy - Available in all states east of the Mississippi River.
Prince - Available in Connecticut, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont.  Acquired from Borden in 2001.
San Giorgio - Available in Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Skinner - Available in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas.
Wacky Mac - Available nationwide, sold exclusively at Walmart stores as of 2015.
Catelli - Acquired from Borden in 2001. Replaced Ronzoni name in Canada since October 13, 2013.
Occhi di lupo  is a variety of large-sized, tubular pasta, served with a stuffing or filling, whose ingredients typically include extra virgin olive oil, ricotta, grated pecorino cheese, and aromatic herbs such as parsley and basil.
Orecchiette  are a pasta typical of Apulia, a region of Southern Italy. Their name comes from their shape, which resembles a small ear.
An orecchietta has the shape of a small dome, with its center thinner than its edge, and with a rough surface. Like other kinds of pasta, orecchiette are made with durum wheat and water. Eggs are rarely used. In traditional Southern Italian home cooking, the dough is rolled, then cut into cubes. Each cube is pressed with a knife, dragging it on the board and making it curl . The shape is then inverted over the thumb.
In the vernacular of Taranto they are called recchietedde, or chiancaredde.
In Cisternino orecchiette are made with durum wheat; they are larger and take on a different shape, with deep internal ribs, very similar to an ear. They are defined recchie d' privte — that is, "priest's ears". The typical dish of holidays is orecchiette with rabbit ragout.
Cavatelli, strascinati  and cencioni are made like orecchiette, without the final step of forming a concave shape. Strascinati and cencioni are typically larger than orecchiette.
In China, a similar type of pasta is called 猫耳朵 .
Orecchiette are typically served with a meat such as pork, capers and a crisp white wine.The traditional dish from Apulia is orecchiette alle cime di rapa, a dish of orecchiette and rapini, also called turnip tops. Broccoli or cauliflower are also widely used as an alternative. Particularly around Capitanata and Salento, orecchiette are traditionally also dressed with tomato sauce , sometimes with miniature meatballs or a sprinkling of ricotta or ricotta forte.
The Italian cookbook Il cucchiaio d'argento  suggests that orecchiette are ideal for vegetable sauces.
Zanini De Vita, Oretta . "Orecchiette". Encyclopedia of Pasta. University of California Press. pp. 188–190. ISBN 978-0-520-94471-8. Retrieved 18 September 2013.
Orecchiette with Broccoli, Anchovies and Cherry Tomatoes from www.recipesfromitaly.com
Orzo , also known as risoni , is a form of short-cut pasta, shaped like a large grain of rice. Orzo is traditionally made from flour, but it can also be made of whole grain.  It is often made with semolina, a type of flour made from durum wheat.  
The name orzo is common for this pasta shape in North America, but less so in Italy, where the word means barley.
There are many different ways to serve orzo. Orzo can be served alone; in soup, especially for children; as part of a salad, a pilaf, or giouvetsi; or baked in a casserole. Orzo can be colored by saffron, chilies, and black beans to yield yellow, orange, or black pasta.
Orzo is essentially identical to the κριθαράκι , or μανέστρα  in Greek cuisine, arpa şehriye  in Turkish cooking, and لسان العصفور  in Egyptian cooking. In Spain, the equivalent pasta is called piñones. Confusion may arise from the fact that piñones is also the Spanish word for pine nuts. Ptitim is a rice-grain-shaped pasta developed in the 1950s in Israel as a substitute for rice.
They are also part of the traditional cuisine of the east of France, from Lorraine to Provence, where they are called pépinettes or riewele depending on the region. In Alsace they are typically served in a chicken broth.
Orzo is often boiled in Italian soups, like minestrone. It can also be boiled and lightly fried, to create a dish similar to risotto.
Paccheri  is a type of pasta in the shape of a very large tube, originating from Campania. They are generally smooth, but there is also a ribbed version, paccheri millerighe. The name comes from Neapolitan paccharia, "slaps" with a depreciative -ero to indicate something common. The name has been ascribed to a slapping sound they may make when eaten.
Pappardelle  are large, very broad, flat pasta, similar to wide fettuccine, originating from the region of Tuscany. The fresh types are two to three centimetres  wide and may have fluted edges, while dried egg pappardelle have straight sides.
Passatelli are a pasta formed of bread crumbs, eggs, grated Parmesan cheese, and in some regions lemon, and nutmeg; it is typically cooked in chicken broth. Typically, it is found in Pesaro e Urbino province , Ancona province  and other regions of Italy, such as Emilia Romagna and Umbria.Passatelli is made by passing the dough through a potato ricer, often into a boiling broth.
Pasta al forno , or timballo di pasta, is a typical dish of Italian cuisine, made of  pasta covered with bechamel, tomato sauce and cheese and cooked in the oven.
Baked pasta can ideally be divided in two big categories: the version with béchamel was born in the Renaissance courts of the Center and North, as a poorer variant of meat pies, from which probably derive very famous dishes such as baked lasagna and Emilian cannelloni; the so-called pasta 'nfurnata or pasta 'ncasciata is instead one of the most typical dishes of Sicily  and has its origins in very ancient traditions, essentially ascribable to the sumptuous timbales that Arabs introduced in Sicily during their domination dating back to the ninth century, to which, however, is due the name timballo itself.
For the preparation of this dish various types of short and medium cut pasta, such as rigatoni, penne, tortiglioni, ziti and maccheroni are used. If the traditional preparation of Messina imposes the use of the typical maccheroncini, the tradition of Palermo requires the use of the typical format of anelletti which give the dish an appearance similar to a flan or timballo. The pasta, cooked very al dente , drained and well mixed with the sauce, is then distributed in layers in a slightly greased baking pan or dish  and alternated with ingredients linked to local traditions. In order to obtain a good quality result, it is necessary to prepare a good sauce, more or less elaborated, but with simple steps and with good quality ingredients; also in this case there are many variations according to local traditions, but generally it is made of minced beef and/or pork, after having been sautéed together with a finely chopped onion, flavored with aromatic herbs, salt and pepper and sprinkled with good red wine, tomato sauce is added and simmered for half an hour in order to allow the sauce to acquire flavor and taste.
The composition of the layers is essentially based on the classic filling of cheeses such as provola or caciocavallo cheese, sliced  cooked ham also in cubes, salami, or more frequently the typical Calabrian schiacciata or soppressata), hard-boiled eggs cut into slices or wedges and the inevitable fried meatballs. Once the distribution is finished with a last layer of pasta, to close, the whole is covered with abundant grated Parmesan cheese, in order to promote the gratinatura of the whole, and the characteristic browning and crispy curvature of the pasta in the upper layer.  
The Sicilian version  among its ingredients, also includes eggplants, usually cut in thin slices and fried or cubed.However, pasta can be prepared in many different ways, and there are many versions – quite common – based on white sauces with onion and minced meat or béchamel sauce, which is usually used to enhance the filling of vegetables such as artichokes or radicchio.
Sicilia . Touring Club Italiano. 1989. p. 108. ISBN 88-365-0350-0.
Pasta alla Norma , earlier called "pasta con le melanzane"  is an Italian dish of pasta and eggplant. It is typical of Sicilian cuisine, from Catania in particular.It is made of spaghetti or other pasta with tomato sauce, covered with slices of fried eggplant and served with grated ricotta salata cheese and often basil.It was named in honor of the native of Catania Vincenzo Bellini, the composer of the opera Norma. It is said that the Italian writer Nino Martoglio exclaimed "This is a real 'Norma'!", meaning a masterpiece, when he tasted the dish, though the name is not attested until decades after his death.Pasta alla Norma was named "dish of the year" by the BIT Tourism Award in 2018.
Pasta con i peperoni cruschi is an Italian pasta dish flavored with peppers and typical of the Basilicata region.
The main ingredient is peperone crusco, a dried and crunchy pepper known for its sweet flavour and intense colour, which is a popular element in the local cuisine. Usually the Senise pepper variety is used, for its thin pulp and low water content which allows a rapid drying.It is served with homemade pasta like cavatelli, strascinati, or ferretti  .
The peppers are cleaned with a dry cloth, deprived of the stalk and the seeds to be subsequently flash-fried in hot olive oil, flavoured with a garlic clove which is removed before the cooking. The frying takes just a few seconds, and they must be immediately extracted to avoid burns that compromise the flavour, giving an unpleasant taste.
The bread crumbs are browned in the same oil. When the  pasta is cooked, the ingredients are mixed, and finally seasoned with some peppers. Optionally, cheeses like pecorino or cacioricotta, and parsley can be added.
Pasta con le sarde  is a Sicilian dish of pasta with sardines and anchovies. It is recognized as a traditional Italian food product in the Prodotto agroalimentare tradizionale scheme of the Italian government. It is most associated with Sicily's capital Palermo, but it can be found all over the island.
The principal ingredients are olive oil, onions, pasta and a finely chopped mixture of sardines and anchovy. Various types of pasta are used for the dish, but bucatini is traditional. Wild fennel, saffron, pine nuts, raisins and salt are added to flavor the dish. To finish the dish it is topped with toasted breadcrumbs. Fresh sardines are preferable, but if these are not available canned sardines can be used. Wild fennel is plentiful in Sicily, but might be hard to find elsewhere; if unobtainable, the tops of ordinary fennel may be used instead.Some variations use tomato sauce. Cookbook author Pino Correnti argues that the tomato-less recipe published in 1886 by the folklorist Giuseppe Pitrè is the only authentic version.
In an interview with CNN's Piers Morgan, late justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Antonin Scalia stated, in response to his interviewer's query, that "pasta con sarde" is his favorite pasta dish.
Pasta e fagioli , meaning "pasta and beans", is a traditional Italian pasta soup. It is often called pasta fasul or pasta fazool in the New York Italian dialect, derived from its Neapolitan name, pasta e fasule.
Recipes for pasta e fagioli vary, the only true requirement being that beans and pasta are included. While the dish varies from region to region, it is most commonly made using cannellini beans, navy beans, or borlotti beans and a small variety of pasta such as elbow macaroni or ditalini. The base typically includes olive oil, garlic, minced onion, celery, carrots, and often stewed tomatoes or tomato paste. Some variations omit tomatoes and instead use a broth base. Preparation may be vegetarian, or contain meat  or a meat-based stock.
The recipe varies greatly based on the region or town in which it is prepared, depending on available ingredients. The consistency of the dish can vary, with some being soupy, while others are much thicker. For instance, in Bari the dish is thicker in consistency and uses mixed pasta shapes. It also uses pancetta in the base of the sauce. Other varieties call for the beans to be passed through a food mill, giving it a stew-like consistency. Pasta e ceci, a version replacing the beans with chickpeas, is common in Rome.
"Pastafazoola", a 1927 novelty song by Van and Schenck, capitalizes on the Neapolitan pronunciation in the rhyme, "Don't be a fool, eat pasta fazool." The song "That's Amore", by Warren and Brooks , includes the rhyme "When the stars make you drool, just like pasta fazool, that's amore". Pasta e fagioli was also among Dean Martin's favorite foods.
Poiatti SPA, or more simply Poiatti, is an Italian pasta manufacturing company based in Sicily.
Domenico Poiatti, born in 1921, in 1940 left Pian D'Artogne for military service. Domenico takes his small family to his native Pian D'Artogne; here he works in his uncle's old water-fed mill that grinds corn and dried chestnuts, but Poiatti returned to Mazara in 1946. Domenico opens a grocery store, then buys a small artisan pasta factory that became the current company.
Poiatti produces 100 forms of pasta with Sicilian wheat, from durum wheat semolina to eggs, from products made from bronze to Couscous. Poiatti S.p.A. has a production plant in Mazara del Vallo on Sicily, with more than 60 employees.
In Italy, the Poiatti pasta is marketed and distributed directly by the company. In the foreign market  the distribution is managed by local partners.
Pasta processing is the process in which wheat semolina or flour is mixed with water and the dough is extruded to a specific shape, dried and packaged.
Durum wheat semolina or flour, common farina or flour, or combination of both is mixed with water and eggs  and other optional ingredients .  Usually 25–30 kg of water is added per 100 kg of semolina. The amounts are measured by computerized dispensers. The mixture is then kneaded by auger extruder equipped with mixing paddles and kneading blades to obtain a homogeneous mass, and after that is extruded through various shaped dies. Drying process begins immediately after the products are shaped to prevent deformation and sticking. The pastas are dried completely in drying chambers and stabilized, then ready for packaging. In modern factories, dry pasta is processed using automatic continuous lines.
In this level wheat semolina and water are mixed by the ratio of 3 to 1. Water should be pure, with no off-flavor and suitable for drinking. Its temperature is about 35-45 °C to help speed up absorption. For egg noodles, eggs are added in the form of fresh eggs, frozen eggs, dry eggs, egg yolks or dry egg solids. If eggs are added to the mixture, the amount of water is modified. Adding egg improves the nutritional quality and richness of the pasta. Disodium phosphate is also added to reduce the cooking time.Mixing the semolina and water takes place in two stages. First, the ingredients are measured and added to a pre-mixer, and then they are transferred to a mixing chamber which finalizes the mixing process and produces a homogeneous mass.
The exact amount of raw materials is very important. Semolina dosing is done by two methods: volumetric feed , and gravimetric feed . In volumetric feed, a specific volume of semolina is measured by variable speed screws or rotary air-lock valves. This method is not very accurate since the amount depends on the density of the semolina. In gravimetric feed, semolina is weighed by a variable speed transport system, which is equipped with a device measuring the flow. Although this method is more accurate, it is more expensive and needs to be isolated.
There are different ways to determine the flow in gravimetric feeds:
Conveyor Belt Feeds: in which one specific portion of the belt is weighed and the speed of the belt is used to calculate the semolina flow.
Loss-in Weight Feeds: in which the change in weight of the hopper which the semolina is poured from indicates the semolina flow.
Slanted Surface System: in which the movements of variable speed extraction elements  are measured by the electronic devices and are converted to the semolina flow.
The exact amount of water needed for the dough depends on the final shape of the pasta. Long pastas should have less moisture content  so they will be able to stretch during the extrusion. Short pastas need less moisture content due to rapid cutting. Various dosing systems are used to pump the water to the mixture. The most common ones are piston pumps in which the water flow rate is controlled by adjusting the piston stroke, screw feeder, and gear and lobe pumps where the speed of the rotation determines the water flow. In more advanced systems, electronic devices are used to regulate the water flow.
The measured amounts of water and semolina are mixed together in pre-mixer to form a crumbly dough. The traditional type of pre-mixer is a trough with a cylindrical section inside which rotates a mixing shaft with blades. More advanced systems use a high-speed  pre-mixer in which water and semolina are sprayed into the chamber, so that each particle of semolina absorbs the correct amount of water.
The final mixer is a trough with shafts which are equipped with mixing blades. Both shafts and blades are made of stainless steel. The shafts run at a low speed  to mix the raw ingredients into a dough. This process usually takes 10–20 minutes.
Some mixers work under atmospheric pressure and others under vacuum. If vacuum is used, the mixture goes directly into the extrusion chamber. When the mixer works under atmospheric pressure, a vacuum unit  conveys the mixture to the extrusion chamber.
Extrusion is the process of kneading and shaping at the same time and in the matter of a few minutes. This process takes place in an extruder which is a grooved extrusion cylinder equipped with an extrusion worm which is a shaft with deep thread around its core. The extrusion worm kneads and moves the dough forward and presses it through the dies in the head of the extruder. The longitudinal grooves in the cylinder reduce the friction and improve the movement of the dough. Both the worm and the cylinder are made of stainless steel, but the worm has a Teflon coating to decrease friction.The temperature of the dough should remain between 40 and 45 °C. If the temperature exceeds 50 °C the gluten network would be damaged, which has a negative effect on the quality of pasta.  Since extra heat is generated by pressure and friction, there are water jackets around the cylinder and head. A large amount of water with high speed and temperature of 38-40 °C is circulated in jackets.The cylinder also has an air vacuum chamber, which removes air bubbles from the dough before extruding. Otherwise small bubbles will form in the pasta and decreases the mechanical strength which cause breakage from hours to days after drying. The air also oxidizes the carotenoid or xanthophyll, which results in a white, chalky appearance of the pasta.
There are different types and shapes of dies to form various shapes of pasta. Generally, pastas are categorized into two large groups: long pasta  and short pasta . Circular dies with rotating blades underneath them are used for short products, where long rectangular dies form the long products. The dies are made of Teflon-coated bronze. The extruder pushes the dough through the dies and blades or trimmers cut the dough in the desired length.  Various patents cover machinery for extruding pasta of different shapes.
Drying is one of the most difficult and critical parts of making pasta. If the pasta dries too fast, it may crack during or after the drying process and acquire a poor appearance and lowered mechanical strength. If the pasta dries too slowly, it may spoil and become moldy. Thus, the drying process must be carefully executed in order to avoid the two aforementioned consequences.
When the pasta leaves the dies it has the moisture content of 31%. The final desired moisture of the dried pasta is about 12%, in order for the pasta to be rigid and have a long storage life. The drying process is slightly different for long and short pastas, but in general, pasta is exposed to hot air to dehydrate the pasta. “Pre-drying” starts immediately after extrusion where the pasta hardens on the outside but is still soft on the inside. It takes one tenth of the whole drying time, and one third of the excess moisture is lost in this stage. “Final drying” removes most of the moisture and gives the pasta a firm shape. This stage consists of two phases: in the first phase the product is exposed to high temperatures and humidity and in the second phase the temperature is dropped quickly and cold air is provided for stabilizing. Stabilizing helps the remaining moisture to distribute evenly through the pasta and prevents cracking.
The spreader hangs the strands of long pastas on the metal sticks where heated air flow is blown to prepare the product for high temperature. Pre-dryer reduces the moisture quickly  in about an hour. Heat is produced by hot water radiators and centrifugal fans. For the first phase of the finish drying, product goes into a dryer with multi rows of hot water circulation plates. This phase decreases high rate of moisture and pasteurized the product. In the second phase warm air are blown to the product in an isolated multi-tier dryer and removes all the excess moisture.
Short pasta pieces fall on the shaker conveyor and powerful hot air is blown to them immediately after the extrusion. This reduces the moisture content by 5% and prevents the pieces from sticking and flattening. Shaker then carries the product through tiers with dry hot air and buckets collect the pasta and spread them on the upper tier of the multi-tier drying unit. This unit has four areas which periods of intense moisture extraction alternately followed by periods of rest occur at eight drying/stabilizing cycle in total. Process ends in cold air chamber for stabilizing.
There are two main packaging systems for dried pasta: cellophane bags which are moisture-proof, easy to use in automatic machines, but difficult to stack, and boxes which are easy to stack and print advertising, and protect the fragile pastas. In packaging line the product is first scaled, then sealed in the package, detected for open flap and metals, double-checked the weight and last packed in large cases.
Long pasta packaging: First the product is weighed by about five scales on a packaging line, then transferred to mechanical buckets which are fitted to the opening of the cartons. The system which is used for long pasta packaging is called horizontal cartoner in which buckets and cartons are both move forward on the packaging line and pasta is poured to the cartons by a mechanical pushing device from the bucket. The cartons then are closed and sealed.
Short pasta packaging: The process of packaging for short pasta are similar to those used for long pasta except that vertical cartoner is used in which the scaling unit is located over the cartoner and weighed pasta is dropped to the passing cartons using only gravity.
Flexible pouch packaging: Both long and short pasta can be packed in flexible plastic packaging materials. The system is called standard form/fill/seal system which is similar to carton packaging.
Plastic overwrapping packaging: The weighed product is manually placed onto a shallow rigid plastic tray and a plastic film is wrapped around the tray and overwrap the package. It then passes a heat tunnel which causes the film to shrink around the pasta.
Pastificio Rigo, also known as Pasta Rigo is a historic Italian pasta factory based in Crespano del Grappa. The company which is a fourth generation business, is currently chaired by Arrigo Rigo, while CEO is Pierangelo Rigo.
The company was founded in 1929 as Pasta del Grappa, after Carlo Rigo, a local merchant who lost his fortunes during the 1929 crisis, along with his sons began producing pasta for the local market in small volumes.
The sons of Carlo, Napoleon and Mario transformed the lab into a small factory, focusing on high quality standards, the brand has developed rapidly and has been extensively expanded.
The next generation, composed by Arrigo and Alberto, Arrigo and Alberto, successfully faced the challenges and opportunities posed by the industrialization of the Italian business landscape of those years, thanks mainly to the choice of cheaper modern cellophane-based boxing and the choice to produce very special pasta shapes. In recent years, whole and gluten-free production has been added.
At present, Rigo operates at the top slice of this niche, producing also as a white label co-packer and combining Italian promotion agencies with Italian firms abroad such as the Italian Trade Agency.
The company has been awarded with numerous certifications such as the International Food Standard , Food BRC and ICEA for Organic, and has been the subject of academic research in a project of Ca' Foscari University of Venice, Veneto and Veneto Industrial League about efficiency and resilience during adverse macroeconomic conditions.
Rigo is renowned in the industry as an ethical employer with a high ratio of women in management positions and a structured program of CSR.
Pasta salad  is a salad dish prepared with one or more types of pasta, almost always chilled, and most often tossed in a vinegar, oil, or mayonnaise-based dressing.  It is typically served as an appetizer, side dish or a main course. Pasta salad is often regarded as a spring or summertime meal, but it can be served any time of year.
Whilst there is no clear origin for the salad, there are various theories that claim different origins for the salad.
Some historians and chefs such as Claudia Roden trace back the origin of pasta salad to Italian Jews in the Roman Empire, who reused cold pasta as Jewish Law prohibited cooking on sabbath. Others date it even further back to the Phoenecians.
The modern version of pasta salad that uses macaroni noodles dates back to 1914 in an American recipe.
The ingredients used vary widely by region, restaurant, seasonal availability, and/or preference of the preparer. The salad can be as simple as cold macaroni mixed with mayonnaise , or as elaborate as several pastas tossed together with a vinaigrette and a variety of fresh, preserved or cooked ingredients. Additional types of pasta may be used, such as ditalini. These can include vegetables, legumes, cheeses, nuts, herbs, spices, meats, poultry, or seafood.  Broccoli, carrot, baby corn, cucumber, olives, onion, beans, chick peas, peppers, and parmesan or feta cheeses are all popular ingredients in versions typically found at North American salad bars.
In Australian and New Zealand cuisine, pasta salad became increasingly popular during the 1990s when commercial versions became more readily available in supermarket stores. It is made of cooked pasta pieces  covered in mayonnaise and accompanied by carrots, capsicum , and sometimes celery. It is similar in style to the American macaroni salad.
Pasta  is a type of food typically made from an unleavened dough of wheat flour mixed with water or eggs, and formed into sheets or other shapes, then cooked by boiling or baking. Rice flour, or legumes such as beans or lentils, are sometimes used in place of wheat flour to yield a different taste and texture, or as a gluten-free alternative. Pasta is a staple food of Italian cuisine.Pastas are divided into two broad categories: dried  and fresh . Most dried pasta is produced commercially via an extrusion process, although it can be produced at home. Fresh pasta is traditionally produced by hand, sometimes with the aid of simple machines. Fresh pastas available in grocery stores are produced commercially by large-scale machines.
Both dried and fresh pastas come in a number of shapes and varieties, with 310 specific forms known by over 1,300 documented names. In Italy, the names of specific pasta shapes or types often vary by locale. For example, the pasta form cavatelli is known by 28 different names depending upon the town and region. Common forms of pasta include long and short shapes, tubes, flat shapes or sheets, miniature shapes for soup, those meant to be filled or stuffed, and specialty or decorative shapes.As a category in Italian cuisine, both fresh and dried pastas are classically used in one of three kinds of prepared dishes: as pasta asciutta , cooked pasta is plated and served with a complementary sauce or condiment; a second classification of pasta dishes is pasta in brodo, in which the pasta is part of a soup-type dish. A third category is pasta al forno, in which the pasta is incorporated into a dish that is subsequently baked in the oven. Pasta dishes are generally simple, but individual dishes vary in preparation. Some pasta dishes are served as a small first course or for light lunches, such as pasta salads. Other dishes may be portioned larger and used for dinner. Pasta sauces similarly may vary in taste, color and texture.In terms of nutrition, cooked plain pasta is 31% carbohydrates , 6% protein, and low in fat, with moderate amounts of manganese, but pasta generally has low micronutrient content. Pasta may be enriched or fortified, or made from whole grains.
First attested in English in 1873, the word pasta comes from Italian pasta, in turn from Latin pasta, latinisation of the Greek παστά, pasta, 'barley porridge'.
The first concrete information on pasta products in Italy dates to the 13th or 14th centuries. 
In the 1st century AD writings of Horace, lagana  were fine sheets of fried dough and were an everyday foodstuff. Writing in the 2nd century, Athenaeus of Naucratis provides a recipe for lagana which he attributes to the 1st century Chrysippus of Tyana: sheets of dough made of wheat flour and the juice of crushed lettuce, then flavoured with spices and deep-fried in oil. An early 5th century cookbook describes a dish called lagana that consisted of layers of dough with meat stuffing, an ancestor of modern-day lasagna. However, the method of cooking these sheets of dough does not correspond to the modern definition of either a fresh or dry pasta product, which only had similar basic ingredients and perhaps the shape. The first concrete information concerning pasta products in Italy dates from the 13th or 14th century.Historians have noted several lexical milestones relevant to pasta, none of which changes these basic characteristics. For example, the works of the 2nd century AD Greek physician Galen mention itrion, homogeneous compounds made of flour and water. The Jerusalem Talmud records that itrium, a kind of boiled dough, was common in Palestine from the 3rd to 5th centuries AD. A dictionary compiled by the 9th century Arab physician and lexicographer Isho bar Ali defines itriyya, the Arabic cognate, as string-like shapes made of semolina and dried before cooking. The geographical text of Muhammad al-Idrisi, compiled for the Norman King of Sicily Roger II in 1154 mentions itriyya manufactured and exported from Norman Sicily:
West of Termini there is a delightful settlement called Trabia . Its ever-flowing streams propel a number of mills. Here there are huge buildings in the countryside where they make vast quantities of itriyya which is exported everywhere: to Calabria, to Muslim and Christian countries. Very many shiploads are sent.
One form of itriyya with a long history is lagana, which in Latin refers to thin sheets of dough, and gave rise to the Italian lasagna.
In North Africa, a food similar to pasta, known as couscous, has been eaten for centuries. However, it lacks the distinguishing malleable nature of pasta, couscous being more akin to droplets of dough. At first, dry pasta was a luxury item in Italy because of high labor costs; durum wheat semolina had to be kneaded for a long time.
There is a legend of Marco Polo importing pasta from China which originated with the Macaroni Journal, published by an association of food industries with the goal of promoting pasta in the United States. Rustichello da Pisa writes in his Travels that Marco Polo described a food similar to "lagana". The way pasta reached Europe is unknown, however there are many theories,  Jeffrey Steingarten asserts that Moors introduced pasta in the Emirate of Sicily in the ninth century, mentioning also that traces of pasta have been found in ancient Greece and that Jane Grigson believed the Marco Polo story to have originated in the 1920s or 1930s in an advertisement for a Canadian spaghetti company.Food historians estimate that the dish probably took hold in Italy as a result of extensive Mediterranean trading in the Middle Ages. From the 13th century, references to pasta dishes—macaroni, ravioli, gnocchi, vermicelli—crop up with increasing frequency across the Italian peninsula. In the 14th-century writer Boccaccio's collection of earthy tales, The Decameron, he recounts a mouthwatering fantasy concerning a mountain of Parmesan cheese down which pasta chefs roll macaroni and ravioli to gluttons waiting below.In the 14th and 15th centuries, dried pasta became popular for its easy storage. This allowed people to store pasta on ships when exploring the New World. A century later, pasta was present around the globe during the voyages of discovery.Although tomatoes were introduced to Italy in the 16th century and incorporated in Italian cuisine in the 17th century, description of the first Italian tomato sauces dates from the late 18th century: the first written record of pasta with tomato sauce can be found in the 1790 cookbook L'Apicio Moderno by Roman chef Francesco Leonardi. Before tomato sauce was introduced, pasta was eaten dry with the fingers; the liquid sauce demanded the use of a fork.
At the beginning of the 17th century, Naples had rudimentary machines for producing pasta, later establishing the kneading machine and press, making pasta manufacturing cost-effective. In 1740, a license for the first pasta factory was issued in Venice. During the 1800s, water mills and stone grinders were used to separate semolina from the bran, initiating expansion of the pasta market. In 1859, Joseph Topits  founded Hungary's first pasta factory, in the city of Pest, which worked with steam machines; it was one of the first pasta factories in Central Europe. By 1867, Buitoni Company in Sansepolcro, Tuscany was an established pasta manufacturer. During the early 1900s, artificial drying and extrusion processes enabled greater variety of pasta preparation and larger volumes for export, beginning a period called "The Industry of Pasta". In 1884, the Zátka Brothers's plant in Boršov nad Vltavou was founded, making it Bohemia's first pasta factory.
The art of pasta making and the devotion to the food as a whole has evolved since pasta was first conceptualized. In 2008, it was estimated that Italians ate over 27 kg  of pasta per person, per year, easily beating Americans, who ate about 9 kg  per person. Pasta is so beloved in Italy that individual consumption exceeds the average production of wheat of the country; thus, Italy frequently imports wheat for pasta making. In contemporary society, pasta is ubiquitous and there is a variety of types in local supermarkets, in many countries. With the worldwide demand for this staple food, pasta is now largely mass-produced in factories and only a tiny proportion is crafted by hand.
Since at least the time of Cato's De Agri Cultura, basic pasta dough has been made mostly of wheat flour or semolina, with durum wheat used predominantly in the South of Italy and soft wheat in the North. Regionally other grains have been used, including those from barley, buckwheat, rye, rice, and maize, as well as chestnut and chickpea flours.
To address the needs of people affected by gluten-related disorders , some recipes use rice or maize for making pasta. Grain flours may also be supplemented with cooked potatoes.Other additions to the basic flour-liquid mixture may include vegetable purees such as spinach or tomato, mushrooms, cheeses, herbs, spices and other seasonings. While pastas are, most typically, made from unleavened doughs, the use of yeast-raised doughs are also known for at least nine different pasta forms.Additives in dried, commercially sold pasta include vitamins and minerals that are lost from the durum wheat endosperm during milling. They are added back to the semolina flour once it is ground, creating enriched flour. Micronutrients added may include niacin , riboflavin , folate, thiamine , and ferrous iron.
Fresh pasta is usually locally made with fresh ingredients unless it is destined to be shipped, in which case consideration is given to the spoilage rates of the desired ingredients such as eggs or herbs. Furthermore, fresh pasta is usually made with a mixture of eggs and all-purpose flour or "00" low-gluten flour. Since it contains eggs, it is more tender compared to dried pasta and only takes about half the time to cook. Delicate sauces are preferred for fresh pasta in order to let the pasta take front stage.Fresh pastas do not expand in size after cooking; therefore, 0.7 kg  of pasta are needed to serve four people generously. Fresh egg pasta is generally cut into strands of various widths and thicknesses depending on which pasta is to be made . It is best served with meat, cheese, or vegetables to create filled pastas such as ravioli, tortellini, and cannelloni. Fresh egg pasta is well known in the Piedmont region and Emilia Romagna region in North Italy. In this area, dough is only made out of egg yolk and flour resulting in a very refined flavour and texture. This pasta is often served simply with butter sauce and thinly sliced truffles that are native to this region. In other areas, such as Apulia, fresh pasta can be made without eggs. The only ingredients needed to make the pasta dough are semolina flour and water, which is often shaped into orecchiette or cavatelli. Fresh pasta for cavatelli is also popular in other places including Sicily. However, the dough is prepared differently: it is made of flour and ricotta cheese instead.
Dried pasta can also be defined as factory-made pasta because it is usually produced in large amounts that require large machines with superior processing capabilities to manufacture. Dried pasta is mainly shipped over to farther locations and has a longer shelf life. The ingredients required to make dried pasta include semolina flour and water. Eggs can be added for flavour and richness, but are not needed to make dried pasta. In contrast to fresh pasta, dried pasta needs to be dried at a low temperature for several days to evaporate all the moisture allowing it to be stored for a longer period. Dried pastas are best served in hearty dishes like ragu sauces, soups, and casseroles. Once it is cooked, the dried pasta will usually grow to twice its original size. Therefore, approximately 0.5 kg  of dried pasta serves up to four people.
Pasta is generally served with some type of sauce; the sauce and the type of pasta are usually matched based on consistency and ease of eating. Northern Italian cooking uses less tomato sauce, garlic and herbs, and white sauce is more common. However Italian cuisine is best identified by individual regions. Pasta dishes with lighter use of tomato are found in Trentino-Alto Adige and Emilia Romagna. In Bologna, the meat-based Bolognese sauce incorporates a small amount of tomato concentrate and a green sauce called pesto originates from Genoa. In Central Italy, there are sauces such as tomato sauce, amatriciana, arrabbiata and the egg-based carbonara.
Tomato sauces are also present in Southern Italian cuisine, where they originated. In Southern Italy more complex variations include pasta paired with fresh vegetables, olives, capers or seafood. Varieties include puttanesca, pasta alla Norma , pasta con le sarde , spaghetti aglio, olio e peperoncino , pasta con i peperoni cruschi .Pasta can be served also in broth  or in vegetable soup, typically minestrone or bean soup .
Ingredients to make pasta dough include semolina flour, egg, salt and water. Flour is first mounded on a flat surface and then a well in the pile of flour is created. Egg is then poured into the well and a fork is used to mix the egg and flour. There are a variety of ways to shape the sheets of pasta depending on the type required. The most popular types include penne, spaghetti, and macaroni.Kitchen pasta machines, also called pasta makers, are popular with cooks who make large amounts of fresh pasta. The cook feeds sheets of pasta dough into the machine by hand and, by turning a hand crank, rolls the pasta to thin it incrementally. On the final pass through the pasta machine, the pasta may be directed through a machine 'comb' to shape of the pasta as it emerges.
Semolina flour consists of a protein matrix with entrapped starch granules. Upon the addition of water, during mixing, intermolecular forces allow the protein to form a more ordered structure in preparation for cooking.Durum wheat is ground into semolina flour which is sorted by optical scanners and cleaned. Pipes allow the flour to move to a mixing machine where it is mixed with warm water by rotating blades. When the mixture is of a lumpy consistency, the mixture is pressed into sheets or extruded. Varieties of pasta such as spaghetti and linguine are cut by rotating blades while pasta such as penne and rotini are extruded. The size and shape of the dies in the extruder through which the pasta is pushed determine the shape that results. The pasta is then dried at a high temperature.
The ingredients to make dried pasta usually include water and semolina flour; egg for colour and richness , and possibly vegetable juice , herbs or spices for colour and flavour. After mixing semolina flour with warm water the dough is kneaded mechanically until it becomes firm and dry. If pasta is to be flavoured, eggs, vegetable juices, and herbs are added at this stage. The dough is then passed into the laminator to be flattened into sheets, then compressed by a vacuum mixer-machine to clear out air bubbles and excess water from the dough until the moisture content is reduced to 12%. Next, the dough is processed in a steamer to kill any bacteria it may contain.
The dough is then ready to be shaped into different types of pasta. Depending on the type of pasta to be made, the dough can either be cut or extruded through dies. The pasta is set in a drying tank under specific conditions of heat, moisture, and time depending on the type of pasta. The dried pasta is then packaged: Fresh pasta is sealed in a clear, airtight plastic container with a mixture of carbon dioxide and nitrogen that inhibits microbial growth and prolongs the product's shelf life; dried pastas are sealed in clear plastic or cardboard packages.
Gluten, the protein found in grains such as wheat, rye, spelt, and barley, contributes to protein aggregation and firm texture of a normally cooked pasta. Gluten-free pasta is produced with wheat flour substitutes, such as vegetable powders, rice, corn, quinoa, amaranth, oats and buckwheat flours. Other possible gluten-free pasta ingredients may include hydrocolloids to improve cooking pasta with high heat resistance, xanthan gum to retain moisture during storage, or hydrothermally-treated polysaccharide mixtures to produce textures similar to those of wheat pasta.
The storage of pasta depends on its processing and extent of drying. Uncooked pasta is kept dry and can sit in the cupboard for a year if airtight and stored in a cool, dry area. Cooked pasta is stored in the refrigerator for a maximum of five days in an airtight container. Adding a couple teaspoons of oil helps keep the food from sticking to itself and the container. Cooked pasta may be frozen for up to two or three months. Should the pasta be dried completely, it can be placed back in the cupboard.
Pasta exhibits a random molecular order rather than a crystalline structure. The moisture content of dried pasta is typically around 12%, indicating that dried pasta will remain a brittle solid until it is cooked and becomes malleable. The cooked product is, as a result, softer, more flexible, and chewy.Semolina flour is the ground endosperm of durum wheat, producing granules that absorb water during heating and an increase in viscosity due to semi-reordering of starch molecules.Another major component of durum wheat is protein which plays a large role in pasta dough rheology. Gluten proteins, which include monomeric gliadins and polymeric glutenin, make up the major protein component of durum wheat . As more water is added and shear stress is applied, gluten proteins take on an elastic characteristic and begin to form strands and sheets. The gluten matrix that results during forming of the dough becomes irreversibly associated during drying as the moisture content is lowered to form the dried pasta product.
Before the mixing process takes place, semolina particles are irregularly shaped and present in different sizes. Semolina particles become hydrated during mixing. The amount of water added to the semolina is determined based on the initial moisture content of the flour and the desired shape of the pasta. The desired moisture content of the dough is around 32% wet basis and will vary depending on the shape of pasta being produced.The forming process involves the dough entering an extruder in which the rotation of a single or double screw system pushes the dough toward a die set to a specific shape. As the starch granules swell slightly in the presence of water and a low amount of thermal energy, they become embedded within the protein matrix and align along the direction of the shear caused by the extrusion process.Starch gelatinization and protein coagulation are the major changes that take place when pasta is cooked in boiling water. Protein and starch competing for water within the pasta cause a constant change in structure as the pasta cooks.
In 2015–16, the largest producers of dried pasta were Italy , the United States , Turkey , Brazil , and Russia . In 2018, Italy was the world's largest exporter of pasta, with $2.9 billion sold, followed by China with $0.9 billion.The largest per capita consumers of pasta in 2015 were Italy , Tunisia , Venezuela  and Greece . In 2017, the United States was the largest consumer of pasta with 2.7 million tons.
When cooked, plain pasta is composed of 62% water, 31% carbohydrates , 6% protein, and 1% fat. A 100-gram  portion of unenriched cooked pasta provides 670 kilojoules  of food energy and a moderate level of manganese , but few other micronutrients.
Pasta has a lower glycemic index than many other staple foods in Western culture, like bread, potatoes, and rice.
As pasta was introduced elsewhere in the world, it became incorporated into a number of local cuisines, which often have significantly different ways of preparation from those of Italy. When pasta was introduced to different nations, each culture would adopt a different style of preparation. In the past, ancient Romans cooked pasta-like foods by frying rather than boiling. It was also sweetened with honey or tossed with garum. Ancient Romans also enjoyed baking it in rich pies, called timballi.
Countries like Somalia, Ethiopia, and Eritrea were introduced to pasta from colonization and occupation through the Italian Empire, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Southern Somalia has a dish called suugo which has a meat sauce, typically beef based, with their local xawaash spice mix. In Ethiopia, pasta can also be served over injera, where it is also eaten with hands instead of cutlery. A dollop of bolognese with berbere spice blend can be served on the side.
In Hong Kong, the local Chinese have adopted pasta, primarily spaghetti and macaroni, as an ingredient in the Hong Kong-style Western cuisine. In cha chaan teng, macaroni is cooked in water and served in broth with ham or frankfurter sausages, peas, black mushrooms, and optionally eggs, reminiscent of noodle soup dishes. This is often a course for breakfast or light lunch fare. These affordable dining shops evolved from American food rations after World War II due to lack of supplies, and they continue to be popular for people with modest means.
Two common spaghetti dishes served in Japan are the Bolognese and the Napolitan.
In Nepal, macaroni has been adopted and cooked in a Nepalese way. Boiled macaroni is sautéed along with cumin, turmeric, finely chopped green chillies, onions and cabbage.
In the Philippines, spaghetti is often served with a distinct, slightly sweet yet flavourful meat sauce , frequently containing ground beef or pork and diced hot dogs and ham. It is spiced with soy sauce, heavy quantities of garlic, dried oregano sprigs and sometimes with dried bay leaf, and topped with grated cheese. Other pasta dishes are also cooked nowadays in Filipino kitchens, like carbonara, pasta with alfredo sauce, and baked macaroni. These dishes are usually cooked for gatherings and special occasions, like family reunions or Christmas. Macaroni or other tube pasta is also used in sopas, a local chicken broth soup.
In Armenia, a popular traditional pasta called arishta is first dry pan toasted so as slightly golden, and then boiled to make the pasta dish which is often topped with yogurt, butter and garlic.In Greece, hilopittes is considered one of the finest types of dried egg pasta. It is cooked either in tomato sauce or with various kinds of casserole meat. It is usually served with Greek cheese of any type.
In Sweden, spaghetti is traditionally served with köttfärssås , which is minced meat in a thick tomato soup.
Twice a year, hundreds of people in Sardinia, Italy, make a nighttime 20-mile  pilgrimage from the city of Nuoro to the village of Lula for the biannual Feast of San Francesco, where they eat what is possibly the world's rarest pasta. Su filindeu  is an incredibly intricate semolina pasta made by just three women who only make the pasta for the festival.
Pasta is also widespread in the Southern Cone, as well most of the rest of Brazil, mostly pervasive in the areas with mild to strong Italian roots, such as Central Argentina, and the eight southernmost Brazilian states . The local names for the pasta are many times varieties of the Italian names, such as ñoquis/nhoque for gnocchi, ravioles/ravióli for ravioli, or tallarines/talharim for tagliatelle, although some of the most popular pasta in Brazil, such as the parafuso , a specialty of the country's pasta salads, are also way different both in name and format from its closest Italian relatives, in this case the fusilli.
Fettuccine alfredo with cream, cheese and butter, and spaghetti with tomato sauce  are popular Italian-style dishes in the United States.
In Australia, boscaiola sauce, based on bacon and mushrooms, is popular.
Although numerous variations of ingredients for different pasta products are known, in Italy the commercial manufacturing and labeling of pasta for sale as a food product within the country is highly regulated. Italian regulations recognise three categories of commercially manufactured dried pasta as well as manufactured fresh and stabilized pasta:
Pasta, or dried pasta with three subcategories –  Durum wheat semolina pasta ,  Low grade durum wheat semolina pasta  and  Durum wheat whole meal pasta . Pastas made under this category must be made only with durum wheat semolina or durum wheat whole-meal semolina and water, with an allowance for up to 3% of soft-wheat flour as part of the durum flour. Dried pastas made under this category must be labeled according to the subcategory.
Special pastas  – As with the pasta above, with additional ingredients other than flour and water or eggs. Special pastas must be labeled as durum wheat semolina pasta on the packaging completed by mentioning the added ingredients used . The 3% soft flour limitation still applies.
Egg pasta  – May only be manufactured using durum wheat semolina with at least 4 hens' eggs  weighing at least 200 grams   per kilogram of semolina, or a liquid egg product produced only with hen's eggs. Pasta made and sold in Italy under this category must be labeled egg pasta.
Fresh and stabilized pastas  – Includes fresh and stabilized pastas, which may be made with soft-wheat flour without restriction on the amount. Prepackaged fresh pasta must have a water content not less than 24%, must be stored refrigerated at a temperature of not more than 4 °C   tolerance), must have undergone a heat treatment at least equivalent to pasteurisation, and must be sold within five days of the date of manufacture. Stabilized pasta has a lower allowed water content of 20%, and is manufactured using a process and heat treatment that allows it to be transported and stored at ambient temperatures.The Italian regulations under Presidential Decree No. 187 apply only to the commercial manufacturing of pastas both made and sold within Italy. They are not applicable either to pasta made for export from Italy or to pastas imported into Italy from other countries. They also do not apply to pastas made in restaurants.
In the US, regulations for commercial pasta products occur both at the federal and state levels. At the Federal level, consistent with Section 341 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food and Drug Administration  has defined standards of identity for what are broadly termed macaroni products. These standards appear in 21 CFR Part 139. Those regulations state the requirements for standardized macaroni products of 15 specific types of dried pastas, including the ingredients and product-specific labeling for conforming products sold in the US, including imports:
Macaroni products – defined as the class of food prepared by drying formed units of dough made from semolina, durum flour, farina, flour, or any combination of those ingredients with water. Within this category various optional ingredients may also be used within specified ranges, including egg white, frozen egg white or dried egg white alone or in any combination; disodium phosphate; onions, celery, garlic or bay leaf, alone or in any combination; salt; gum gluten; and concentrated glyceryl monostearate. Specific dimensions are given for the shapes named macaroni, spaghetti and vermicelli.
Enriched macaroni products – largely the same as macaroni products except that each such food must contain thiamin, riboflavin, niacin or niacinamide, folic acid and iron, with specified limits. Additional optional ingredients that may be added include vitamin D, calcium, and defatted wheat germ. The optional ingredients specified may be supplied through the use of dried yeast, dried torula yeast, partly defatted wheat germ, enriched farina, or enriched flour.
Enriched macaroni products with fortified protein – similar to enriched macaroni products with the addition of other ingredients to meet specific protein requirements. Edible protein sources that may be used include food grade flours or meals from nonwheat cereals or oilseeds. Products in this category must include specified amounts of thiamin, riboflavin, niacin or niacinamide and iron, but not folic acid. The products in this category may also optionally contain up to 625 milligrams  of calcium.
Milk macaroni products – the same as macaroni products except that milk or a specified milk product is used as the sole moistening ingredient in preparing the dough. Other than milk, allowed milk products include concentrated milk, evaporated milk, dried milk, and a mixture of butter with skim, concentrated skim, evaporated skim, or nonfat dry milk, in any combination, with the limitation on the amount of milk solids relative to amount of milk fat.
Nonfat milk macaroni products – the same as macaroni products except that nonfat dry milk or concentrated skim milk is used in preparing the dough. The finished macaroni product must contain between 12% and 25% milk solids-not-fat. Carageenan or carageenan salts may be added in specified amounts. The use of egg whites, disodium phosphate and gum gluten optionally allowed for macaroni products is not permitted for this category.
Enriched nonfat milk macaroni products – similar to nonfat milk macaroni products with added requirements that products in this category contain thiamin, riboflavin, niacin or niacinamide, folic acid and iron, all within specified ranges.
Vegetable macaroni products – macaroni products except that tomato , artichoke, beet, carrot, parsley or spinach is added in a quantity such that the solids of the added component are at least 3% by weight of the finished macaroni product. The vegetable additions may be in the form of fresh, canned, dried or a puree or paste. The addition of either the various forms of egg whites or disodium phosphate allowed for macaroni products is not permitted in this category.
Enriched vegetable macaroni products – the same as vegetable macaroni products with the added requirement for nutrient content specified for enriched macaroni products.
Whole wheat macaroni products – similar to macaroni products except that only whole wheat flour or whole wheat durum flour, or both, may be used as the wheat ingredient. Further the addition of the various forms of egg whites, disodium phosphate and gum gluten are not permitted.
Wheat and soy macaroni products – begins as macaroni products with the addition of at least 12.5% of soy flour as a fraction of the total soy and wheat flour used. The addition the various forms of egg whites and disodium phosphate are not permitted. Gum gluten may be added with a limitation that the total protein content derived from the combination of the flours and added gluten not exceed 13%.
Noodle products – the class of food that is prepared by drying units of dough made from semolina, durum flour, farina, flour, alone or in any combination with liquid eggs, frozen eggs, dried eggs, egg yolks, frozen yolks, dried yolks, alone or in any combination, with or without water. Optional ingredients that may be added in allowed amounts are onions, celery, garlic, and bay leaf; salt; gum gluten; and concentrated glyceryl monostearate.
Enriched noodle products – similar to noodle products with the addition of specific requirements for amounts of thiamin, riboflavin, niacin or niacinamide, folic acid and iron, each within specified ranges. Additionally products in this category may optionally contain added vitamin D, calcium or defatted wheat germ, each within specified limits.
Vegetable noodle products – the same as noodle products with the addition of tomato , artichoke, beet, carrot, parsley, or spinach in an amount that is at least 3% of the finished product weight. The vegetable component may be added as fresh, canned, dried, or in the form of a puree or paste.
Enriched vegetable noodle products – the same as vegetable noodle products excluding carrot, with the specified nutrient requirements for enriched noodle products.
Wheat and soy noodle products – similar to noodle products except that soy flour is added in a quantity not less than 12.5% of the combined weight of the wheat and soy ingredients.
The federal regulations under 21 CFR Part 139 are standards for the products noted, not mandates. Following the FDA's standards, a number of states have, at various times, enacted their own statutes that serve as mandates for various forms of macaroni and noodle products that may be produced or sold within their borders. Many of these specifically require that the products sold within those states be of the enriched form. According to a report released by the Connecticut Office of Legislative Research, when Connecticut's law was adopted in 1972 that mandated certain grain products, including macaroni products, sold within the state to be enriched it joined 38 to 40 other states in adopting the federal standards as mandates.
Beyond the FDA's standards and state statutes, the United States Department of Agriculture , which regulates federal school nutrition programs, broadly requires grain and bread products served under these programs either be enriched or whole grain  ). This includes macaroni and noodle products that are served as part the category grains/breads requirements within those programs. The USDA also allows that enriched macaroni products fortified with protein may be used and counted to meet either a grains/breads or meat/alternative meat requirement, but not as both components within the same meal.
Serventi, Silvano; Sabban, Françoise . Pasta: the Story of a Universal Food. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231124422.
Pastina  is a variety of pasta consisting of tiny pieces of pasta, typically of a round  shape with a diameter of about 1.6 millimetres . It is the smallest type of pasta produced. It is made of wheat flour and may also include egg. In Italy, pastina is a general term referring to many small shapes of pasta. In North America, however, the term pastina is usually used to refer to one type of pastina: "stellina." 
Pastina is used in many different ways in Italian cuisine, including as an ingredient of soup, desserts, infant food and also, alone, as a distinct and unique pasta dish.Ronzoni, the flagship brand of New World Pasta, discontinued its use of pastina in January 2023.
Penne  is an extruded type of pasta with cylinder-shaped pieces, their ends cut at an angle. Penne usually made from wheat flour. Penne is the plural form of the Italian penna , deriving from Latin penna , and is a cognate of the English word pen. When this format was created, it was intended to imitate the then-ubiquitous steel nib of fountain and dip pens.
Penne is one of the few pasta shapes with a certain date of birth: in 1865, Giovanni Battista Capurro, a pasta maker from San Martino d'Albaro , obtained a patent for a diagonal cutting machine. His invention cut the fresh pasta into a pen shape without crushing it, in a size varying between 3 cm  mezze penne  and 5 cm  penne .
In Italy, penne are produced in two main variants: penne lisce  and penne rigate , the latter having ridges on each penna. Pennoni  is a wider version of penne. In English-language contexts, a version is called mostaccioli by various manufacturers, which may be either smooth or ridged in texture.Penne is traditionally cooked al dente and its shape makes it particularly adapted for sauces, such as pesto, marinara, or arrabbiata. The latter has been celebrated several times in Italian movies, notably in Marco Ferrari's La Grande Bouffe and Federico Fellini's Roma.
Pici  is thick, hand-rolled pasta, like fat spaghetti. It originates in the province of Siena in Tuscany; in the Montalcino area they are also referred to as pinci .
The dough is typically made from flour and water only. The addition of egg is optional, being determined by family traditions. Alternatively, finely chopped or shredded spinach can be used in place of water.
The dough is rolled out in a thick flat sheet, then cut into strips. In some families, the strip of dough is rolled between one palm and the table, while the other hand is wrapped with the rest of the strip. It can also be formed by rolling the strip between the palms. Either method forms a thick pasta, slightly thinner than a common pencil. Due to its handmade nature, this pasta is not uniform in size and has variations of thickness along its length.
It is eaten with a variety of sauces and meats, particularly:
Pillus  is a type of pasta found in Sardinia, particularly around Oristano.  A noodle-like pasta, it is made in thin ribbon strips.  A feature of this pasta is that it is kneaded for a long time.  It is cooked in beef  broth and served with pecorino cheese.  In Busachi the pasta is flavoured with toasted saffron and ground to a powder.Lisanzedas is a variant of pillus  that is oven-baked in layers like lasagne.  The shape of the pasta is large  diameter disks rather than ribbons.  It is the meat stew filling and the pecorino cheese that are the common factors rather than the shape of the pasta.  A variant of lisanzedas found around Cagliari is flavoured with saffron.  Another variant of this sort from Giba is flavoured with fennel.
Pillus pasta with goat meat, image of dish from Zinnibiri restaurant, Sardinia
Piombi  is a former prison in the Doge's Palace in Venice. The name of the prison refers to its position directly under the roof of the palace, which was covered with slabs of lead. In winter, these slabs let the cold pass and they acted as a conductor in the summer heat, imposing harsh conditions for inmates.
The Piombi prison was divided into six rooms, separated by wooden partitions strengthened with iron plates. Access to the prison was by two staircases, one located in the Sala dei Tre Capi  and the other in a corridor near the Sala degli Inquisitori di Stato . Light is reached through small windows overlooking the waterway called Rio di Palazzo. The ceilings were made of lead, but under this was a double planking in larch, which made the prisons hot in summer.The inmates could have furniture and furnishings such as beds and dishes. They had medical assistance, food brought from outside or to order, and a cash allowance for small needs.
Construction dates back to the 16th century, which is testified by a promulgation of the Council of Ten, dated March 15, 1591. It said that since the pre-existing Wells were too harsh for the detention of prisoners it was necessary to build a new structure to house those convicted of minor crimes. The Piombi were built in the attic of the building, where the Council of Ten had its archive, above the Sala dei Tre Capi.
Some famous people were imprisoned there, including Paolo Antonio Foscarini and Giacomo Casanova. On November 1, 1756, Giacomo Casanova made a famous escape from the prison. He published the story of his escape in 1787.
In 1797, Piombi was abandoned due to a reorganization of prison use. It was replaced as a city prison used for drug addicts, located on the island of Giudecca, until 1926.
The old prisons inside the Doge's Palace were supplemented by the New Prison, built across the Rio de Palazzo from the palace.  The New Prison was connected to the old prisons in the Palace by the Bridge of Sighs.
Pizzoccheri  is a type of short tagliatelle, a flat ribbon pasta, made with 80% buckwheat flour and 20% wheat flour. They are believed to have originated in Valtellina, a small valley in Lombardy in northern Italy.
Pizzoccheri can be made by hand or can be purchased pre-made; however, if pizzoccheri is prepared at home, it must generally be eaten the same day.
The dish was first identified in 1550, in the Category of Inventories of Things that May be Eaten in Italy by Ortensio Lando.In the 1799 book Die Republik Graubündent , German historian Heinrich L. Lehmann wrote about a "perzockel" dough made from buckwheat flour and egg.
Two pizzoccheri fairs  take place in Teglio: La Sagra dei Pizzoccheri, celebrated annually in July and the festival of The Golden Pizzocchero, celebrated annually in September.
In 2002, the Accademia del Pizzocchero di Teglio was founded to promote traditional preparations of pizzocchero.In 2016, the dish gained the European Union's recognition of Protected Geographical Indication .
Pizzoccheri della Valtellina, the original variation from Valtellina, are cooked along with greens , and cubed potatoes. This mixture is layered with pieces of Valtellina Casera cheese and ground Grana Padano or Parmigiano Reggiano, and dressed with garlic lightly fried in butter.Pizzoccheri bianchi, from the area around Chiavenna, are quite distinct, being a form of gnocchetti, often made from white wheat flour and dry bread.
Radiatori are small, squat pasta shapes that are said to resemble radiators. Although it is rumored that they were created in the 1960s by an industrial designer, their invention was actually between the First and Second World War. They are often used in similar dishes as rotelle or fusilli, because their shape works well with thicker sauces. They are also used in casseroles, salads, and soups. The form is sometimes called pagoda pasta.
Radiatori somewhat resemble rotini in shape, but are generally shorter and thicker with a ruffled edge, circling the pasta. They are modelled after an old industrial heating fixture, having a straight "pipe" with concentric, parallel fins. Their design creates hollows to trap sauce.
Ravioli  are a type of pasta comprising a filling enveloped in thin pasta dough. Usually served in broth or with a sauce, they originated as a traditional food in Italian cuisine. Ravioli are commonly square, though other forms are also used, including circular and semi-circular .
Ravioli are mentioned in the personal letters of Francesco di Marco Datini, a merchant of Prato in the 14th century. In Venice, the mid-14th-century manuscript Libro per cuoco offers ravioli of green herbs blanched and minced, mixed with beaten egg and fresh cheese, simmered in broth and seasoned with "sweet and strong spices".  In Rome, ravioli were already well known when Bartolomeo Scappi served them with boiled chicken to the papal conclave of 1549.Ravioli appear in the 14th-century cookbook The Forme of Cury under the name of rauioles. Sicilian ravioli and Malta's ravjul may be older than North Italian ones. Maltese ravjul are stuffed with irkotta, the locally produced sheep's-milk ricotta, or  with gbejna, the traditional fresh sheep's-milk cheese.
English and French borrowed the word ravioli from Italian in the 14th century. The ultimate origin of the word is uncertain. It is sometimes connected to the northern Italian word rava 'turnip', supposing that the filling was made of turnips, but the earliest recipes, even Lenten ones, do not include turnips. Another theory connects it to a kind of cheese , but that also appears unlikely.
Traditionally, ravioli are made at home. The filling varies according to the area where they are prepared. In Rome and Latium the filling is made with ricotta cheese, spinach, nutmeg and black pepper. In Sardinia, ravioli are filled with ricotta and grated lemon rind.
In Europe and the United States, fresh-packed ravioli have several weeks of shelf life. Canned ravioli were pioneered by the Italian Army in the First World War and were popularized by Heinz and Buitoni in the UK and Europe, and Chef Boyardee in the United States. Canned ravioli may be filled with beef, processed cheese, chicken, or Italian sausage and served in a tomato, tomato-meat, or tomato-cheese sauce. Toasted ravioli  was developed in St. Louis, Missouri, and is a popular appetizer and snack food.Ravioli are commonly encountered in the cooking of Nice, the broader Côte d'Azur, and the surrounding regions in the south of France. The contents of these vary greatly, but most idiosyncratic to the region is the use of leftover daube meat.  Miniaturized cheese-filled ravioli, locally called ravioles du Dauphiné, are a specialty of the Drôme department in the Rhône-Alpes region, particularly the commune of Romans-sur-Isère, and are frequently served au gratin.
Ravioli filled with halloumi are a traditional pasta dish of Cypriot cuisine. They are boiled in chicken stock and served with grated halloumi and dried mint on top.
In Turkey, Mantı which is similar to ravioli is a popular dish. It is stuffed with spiced meat and served with paprika sauce and yoghurt. Similar dishes in China are the jiaozi or wonton.
In India, a popular dish called gujiya is similar to ravioli. However, it is prepared sweet, with a filling of dry fruits, sugar, and a mixture of sweet spices, then deep fried in vegetable oil. Different stuffings are used in different parts of India. The dish is a popular food prepared during festivals all over the country.
Jewish cuisine has a similar dish called kreplach, a pocket of meat or other filling, with an egg pasta based covering. It is simmered in chicken soup. In that method of preparation it appears to be the direct descendant or inspiration of the original dish, which was simmered in "broth".A similar Middle Eastern dish called shishbarak contains pasta filled with minced beef meat and cooked in hot yogurt.
Adamson, Melitta Weiss; ed.  Regional Cuisines of Medieval Europe: A Book of Essays. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-92994-6.
Davidson, Alan, ed. . The Oxford Companion to Food. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-192-11579-9.
Dickie, John . Delizia! The Epic History of the Italians and Their Food. Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-7799-0.
McNulty, Mary F. "Pasta". How Products are Made. Madehow.com. Retrieved 1 September 2013.
Smith, Andrew F., ed. . The Oxford Companion to American Food and Drink. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530796-2. Retrieved 5 September 2012.
Wolfert, Paula . Mediterranean Clay Pot Cooking: Traditional and Modern Recipes to Savor and Share. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons. p. 176. ISBN 978-0-764-57633-1.
Machine-made ravioli , commercial demonstration of machine producing different kinds of pasta, including ravioli
Rigatoni  is a type of pasta originating in Italy. They are larger than penne and ziti, and sometimes slightly curved. They are not as curved as elbow macaroni. Rigatoni characteristically have ridges down their length, sometimes spiraling around the tube, and unlike penne, rigatoni's ends are cut square  to the tube walls instead of diagonally.
The word "rigatoni" comes from the Italian word rigato , which means "ridged" or "lined", and is associated with the cuisine of southern and central Italy. Rigatoncini are a smaller version, close to the size of penne. Their name takes on the diminutive suffix -ino  denoting their relative size.
Rigatoni is a particular favorite pasta shape in the south of Italy, especially in Sicily. Its eponymous ridges make better adhesive surfaces for sauces and grated cheese than smooth-sided pasta like ziti.
Rigatoni con la pajata  is a classic dish of the Roman cuisine. The dish can be found in some traditional trattorias in Rome. Pajata is the term for the intestines of a calf  only fed with its mother’s milk.
Rotelle is a type of pasta resembling wheels with spokes. They are similar to fiori.
The name derives from the Italian word for a small wheel. In Italy they are also called "ruote", and in the US they are usually called "wagon wheels".
Sacchettoni  is a type of stuffed pasta also known as "beggar's purse".  It consists of small circles or squares of pasta filled like ravioli then fastened at the top like a small bag.
Sagnarelli  is a type of ribbon pasta originating in Abbruze. They are typically rectangular ribbons with fluted edges. It is typically served with a cream sauce and their sometimes uneven texture helps to hold thick sauces better.
Mezzelune , also known as Schlutzkrapfen in South Tyrol, Tyrol, and neighbouring German-speaking regions and as crafuncins or cajincì in Ladin-speaking regions, are a semi-circular stuffed pasta, similar to ravioli or pierogi. The dough is usually made of white flour or buckwheat flour, durum semolina, mixed with eggs and olive oil. Typical fillings may include cheese , spinach, or mushrooms . There are also recipes with potato, meat, red beet, or sauerkraut filling. The dish may be served with mushroom or pesto sauce, with salsiccia, with seafood, and/or with cherry tomatoes.
Similar types of pasta are known as casunziei in Dolomites area, casoncelli in Lombardy, and cjarsons in Friuli.
Sedani are a type of pasta slightly larger than macaroni, with a similar slight bend. They can be smooth  or furrowed .
Initially named zanne d'elefante , they were renamed sedani  after the trade of ivory was banned.
Spaghetti alla chitarra , also known as maccheroni alla chitarra, is a variety of egg pasta typical of the Abruzzo region in Italy, with a square cross section about 2–3 mm thick. Tonnarelli are a similar pasta from Lazio.  Ciriole is the thicker version of chitarra, approximately twice the thickness of spaghetti. Because the pasta are cut from a sheet rather than extruded through a die, spaghetti alla chitarra are square rather than round in cross-section.
The name of this spaghetti comes from the tool  this pasta is produced with. This tool gives the spaghetti its name, shape, and a porous texture that allows pasta sauce to adhere well to the pasta itself. The chitarra is a frame with a series of parallel wires crossing it.
The origin of the chitarra is still not very clear, though a traditional recipe from the province of Teramo originated in the early 1800s or even before. It is also claimed that the chitarra originated from the province of Chieti. Before then, pasta was cut with a special rolling pin with notches to obtain its particular shape. Although its origins are from Abruzzo, you can find different versions and names in the southern part of Italy. It gets the name of tonnarelli in Lazio, torchioli, troccoli, or truoccoli in Basilicata and Apulia, or cirioli Molisani in Molise.The dough consists of durum wheat semolina and eggs, with no added salt. It is then worked and, after a rest of about 30 minutes covered, rolled flat with a rolling pin. The dough is then placed on the chitarra and pushed through with the rolling pin, so that the strings of the "guitar" cut it into strips. Pasta makers from Abruzzo bring down the cut dough by passing their fingers over it, as they would "play a guitar".In Abruzzo, maccheroni alla chitarra are most typically prepared with a ragù of pork, beef, and lamb. In particular areas of the Abruzzi  the traditional condiment is tomato sauce with beef meatballs, so-called pallottine. In Abruzzo, chitarra alla teramana, which is a traditional Abruzzo recipe, is a long thin squared spaghetti pasta served with tiny meatballs . It is generally a first course meal .
A dried variation, without egg, is often marketed as spaghetti or maccheroni alla chitarra both within and outside Italy.
Spaghetti  is a long, thin, solid, cylindrical pasta. It is a staple food of traditional Italian cuisine. Like other pasta, spaghetti is made of milled wheat, water, and sometimes enriched with vitamins and minerals. Italian spaghetti is typically made from durum-wheat semolina. Usually the pasta is white because refined flour is used, but whole wheat flour may be added. Spaghettoni is a thicker form of spaghetti, while spaghettini is a thinner form. Capellini is a very thin spaghetti, sometimes known colloquially as "angel hair pasta", while Vermicelli refers to intermediate widths, varying between the United States and Italy.
Originally, spaghetti was notably long, but shorter lengths gained in popularity during the latter half of the 20th century and now it is most commonly available in 25–30 cm  lengths. A variety of pasta dishes are based on it and it is frequently served with tomato sauce, meat or vegetables.
Spaghetti is the plural form of the Italian word spaghetto, which is a diminutive of spago, meaning 'thin string' or 'twine'.
The first written record of pasta comes from the Talmud in the 5th century AD and refers to dried pasta that could be cooked through boiling, which was conveniently portable. Some historians think that Arabs introduced pasta to Europe during a conquest of Sicily. In the West, it may have first been worked into long, thin forms in Sicily around the 12th century, as the Tabula Rogeriana of Muhammad al-Idrisi attested, reporting some traditions about the Sicilian kingdom.The popularity of spaghetti spread throughout Italy after the establishment of spaghetti factories in the 19th century, enabling the mass production of spaghetti for the Italian market.In the United States around the end of the 19th century, spaghetti was offered in restaurants as Spaghetti Italienne  and it was not until decades later that it came to be commonly prepared with oregano or basil.
Spaghetti is made from ground grain  and water. Whole-wheat and multigrain spaghetti are also available.
At its simplest, imitation spaghetti can be formed using no more than a rolling pin and a knife. A home pasta machine simplifies the rolling and makes the cutting more uniform. Although, of course cutting sheets produces pasta with a rectangular rather than a cylindrical cross-section and the result is a variant of fettuccine. Some pasta machines have a spaghetti attachment with circular holes that extrude spaghetti or shaped rollers that form cylindrical noodles.Spaghetti can be made by hand by manually rolling a ball of dough on a surface to make a long sausage shape. The ends of the sausage are pulled apart to make a long thin sausage. The ends are brought together and the loop pulled to make two long sausages. The process is repeated until the pasta is sufficiently thin. The pasta knobs at each end are cut off leaving many strands which may be hung up to dry.Fresh spaghetti would normally be cooked within hours of being formed. Commercial versions of fresh spaghetti are manufactured.
The bulk of dried spaghetti is produced in factories using auger extruders. While essentially simple, the process requires attention to detail to ensure that the mixing and kneading of the ingredients produces a homogeneous mix, without air bubbles. The forming dies have to be water cooled to prevent spoiling of the pasta by overheating. Drying of the newly formed spaghetti has to be carefully controlled to prevent strands sticking together, and to leave it with sufficient moisture so that it is not too brittle. Packaging for protection and display has developed from paper wrapping to plastic bags and boxes.
Fresh or dry spaghetti is cooked in a large pot of salted, boiling water and then drained in a colander .
In Italy, spaghetti is generally cooked al dente , fully cooked but still firm to the bite. It may also be cooked to a softer consistency.
Spaghettoni is a thicker spaghetti which takes more time to cook. Spaghettini is a thinner form which takes less time to cook. Capellini is a very thin form of spaghetti  which cooks very quickly.
Utensils used in spaghetti preparation include the spaghetti scoop and spaghetti tongs.
An emblem of Italian cuisine, spaghetti is frequently served with tomato sauce, which may contain various herbs , olive oil, meat, or vegetables. Other spaghetti preparations include amatriciana or carbonara. Grated hard cheeses, such as Pecorino Romano, Parmesan and Grana Padano, are often sprinkled on top.
In some countries, spaghetti is sold in cans/tins with sauce.In the United States, it is sometimes served with Cincinnati chili. Unlike in Italy, in other countries spaghetti is often served with Bolognese sauce.In the Philippines, a popular variant is the Filipino spaghetti, which is distinctively sweet with the tomato sauce sweetened with banana ketchup or sugar. It typically uses a large amount of giniling , sliced hotdogs, and cheese. The dish dates back to the period between the 1940s to the 1960s. During the American Commonwealth Period, a shortage of tomato supplies in the Second World War forced the development of the banana ketchup. Spaghetti was introduced by the Americans and was tweaked to suit the local Filipino predilection for sweet dishes.Sapaketti phat khi mao  is a popular dish in Thai cuisine.Spaghetti is a main part of laksa Johor, a specialty from Johor, Malaysia.
Spaghetti aglio e olio – , a traditional Italian pasta dish coming from Naples.
Spaghetti alla puttanesca – , a tangy, somewhat salty Italian pasta dish invented in the mid-20th century. The ingredients are typical of Southern Italian cuisine: tomatoes, olive oil, olives, capers and garlic.
Spaghetti alla Nerano – from the village of Nerano, near Naples. With fried zucchinis and a local variant of provolone.
Spaghetti alle vongole – Italian for "spaghetti with clams", it is very popular throughout Italy, especially its central regions, including Rome and further south in Campania .
Spaghetti and meatballs – an Italian-American dish that usually consists of spaghetti, tomato sauce and meatballs.
By 1955, annual consumption of spaghetti in Italy doubled from 14 kilograms  per person before World War II to 28 kilograms . By that year, Italy produced 1,432,990 tons of spaghetti, of which 74,000 were exported, and had a production capacity of 3 million tons.
Pasta provides carbohydrates, along with some protein, iron, dietary fiber, potassium and B vitamins. Pasta prepared with whole wheat grain provides more dietary fiber than that prepared with degermed flour.
The world record for the largest bowl of spaghetti was set in March 2009 and reset in March 2010 when a Buca di Beppo restaurant in Garden Grove, California, filled a swimming pool with more than 6,250 kg  of pasta.
The term Spaghetti Western was used by American critics and those in other countries because most of the Western movies made in Europe were produced and directed by Italians.The BBC television program Panorama featured a hoax program about the spaghetti harvest in Switzerland on April Fools' Day, 1957.The story "Confession publique faite par la dernière mangeuse de spaghettis", from the collection Le Génie de l'aubergine et autres contes loufoques, by Pierre Cormon , features a woman who refuses to give up traditional spaghetti in favour of spaghetti cubes, the latest innovation from the agri-food industry in 2053, and pays a high price for it.
Zanini De Vita, Oretta; Fant, Maureen B. . Sauces & Shapes: Pasta the Italian Way. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-08243-2.
Butler, Stephanie . "Spaghetti and Its Sauces". History Channel. Retrieved 16 December 2014.
Stringozzi  or Strangozzi  is an Italian wheat pasta, among the more notable of those produced in the Umbria region. The long, rectangular cross-section noodles are made by hand and generally served with the local black truffles, a meat ragù or a tomato-based sauce. The name of the pasta is drawn from its resemblance to shoelaces, as stringhe is Italian for '"strings".
Strozzapreti  are an elongated form of cavatelli, or hand-rolled pasta typical of the Emilia-Romagna, Tuscany, Marche and Umbria regions of Italy as well as in the state of San Marino. The name is also used for a baked cheese and vegetable dumpling, prepared in some regions of Italy and on the French island of Corsica.
There are several legends to explain the name, primarily based on the anticlerical sentiment of the region.
One is that gluttonous priests were so enthralled by the savory pasta that they ate too quickly and choked themselves. Another explanation involves the "azdora" , who "chokes" the dough strips to make the strozzapreti. The azdora would express rage  and curse the local clergy, resulting in a pasta that could choke a priest. A third states that wives would customarily make the pasta for churchmen as partial payment for land rents , and their husbands would be angered enough by the venal priests eating their wives' food to wish the priests would choke as they stuffed their mouths with it. The name surely reflects the diffuse anticlericalism of the people of Romagna and Tuscany.
Another possible explanation is that following Sunday mass, it was common for the priest to visit homes of the villagers and enjoy dinner with them. The more pleasant experiences for the priest would entice them to come back to that particular home more frequently. As a means for the family to let the priest know that he might be overextending his welcome, they would serve this pasta which had later earned the name "Strozzapreti." Another origin story is that the pasta resembles a clerical collar, commonly referred to as a "Priest Choker".
The name strozzapreti can refer either to a fresh pasta type or to a gnocchi type.
In the cuisine of Romagna strozzapreti are short twisted cords obtained by hand from water and flour pasta. In the countryside between Faenza and Lugo, strozzapreti col nodo are widespread, obtained by knotting each piece of pasta after twisting it on itself.
In the cuisine of Imola and Ravenna between the end of the 1800s and the middle of the 1900s, strozzapreti were called "suffocated priests", a terminology that has since disappeared, and were slightly larger.
In Emilia the dough is made from flour, water, Parmesan cheese, and egg whites, all beaten together.
In Umbrian cuisine with the term strozzapreti or strangozzi is meant a long pasta with a square section made of water and flour.
In the Latium cuisine the strozzapreti are spaghettoni pulled by hand. In the area of Viterbo, the stratto is a handmade pasta, typical of the town of Blera, seasoned with tartufi.
In the city of L'Aquila in Abruzzo the strangolapreti are big cords of pasta of Triticum durum long about 20 cm.
Pici is a somewhat similar form of pasta from Tuscany in which hand-rolled, solid fat tubes of dough are cut but left untwisted; the taut, rope-like appearance provides yet another popular explanation for the association with strangling.The dough  is rolled out in thick flat sheets. It is then cut into strips. The strips are lightly rolled or twisted between the palms. The large pasta is separated into 10 cm pieces by pinching. Unlike spaghetti or macaroni, this pasta is not uniform in size or shape.
In the Trentino cuisine  and in the Milanese cuisine the strangolapreti are gnocchi made of stale bread, spinach, eggs and grana cheese from Trentino, served with melted butter and sage. In Milanese and Larian cuisine, soft cheese is also added.
In the Neapolitan cuisine with the term strangulapriévete are designated simple gnocchi, made at home with water and flour.
In the Salentine cuisine with the term strangulaprevati are meant the potato dumplings.
In the Calabrian cuisine the strangugliapreviti are dumplings made of flour and eggs; in the nicastrese tradition they are the dish of  Martedi' Grasso.
In the Corsican cuisine the name "sturzapréti"  refers also to large gnocchi made of cheese and vegetables, and then baked. Seasoned spinach or chard is rolled into balls together with brocciu cheese, and then baked in the oven. These balls are large enough to choke a person if eaten whole.
Gosetti Della Salda, Anna . Le ricette regionali italiane . Milano: Solares.
Tagliatelle  is a traditional type of pasta from the Emilia-Romagna and Marche regions of Italy. Individual pieces of tagliatelle are long, flat ribbons that are similar in shape to fettuccine and are traditionally about 6 mm  wide. Tagliatelle can be served with a variety of sauces, though the classic is a meat sauce or Bolognese sauce.
Tagliatelle are traditionally made with egg pasta. The traditional ratio is one egg to one hundred grams of flour.
The recipe was called tagliolini di pasta e sugo, alla maniera di Zafiran  and it was served on silver plates. Over the years, tagliatelle has become considered a more common food.
A glass case in the Bologna Chamber of Commerce holds a solid gold replica of a piece of tagliatella, demonstrating the correct width of 8 mm  when cooked, equivalent to 6.5–7 mm  uncooked, depending on the hardness of the dough.
The texture is porous and rough, making it ideal for thick sauces, generally made with beef, veal, or pork , and occasionally with rabbit, as well as several other less rich  options, such as briciole e noci , uovo e formaggio , or simply pomodoro e basilico .
Tagliolini  is a type of ribbon pasta, long like spaghetti, roughly 2–3 mm  wide, similar to tagliatelle, but thin like capellini. It is a traditional recipe in the Molise and Piedmont regions of Italy. In Piedmont it is called tajarin and made of egg dough . The dough also contains semolina, flour and salt. It is typically served with butter and truffles  or sugo d’arrosto, a sauce made from the drippings of roast meat. Tagliolini have a short cooking time, especially when made from fresh dough, and work best with light sauces, fish, delicacies or soups.
The word tagliolini is a diminutive of tagliare which means to cut.
Tarhonya in Hungarian or tarhoňa in Slovak, is an egg-based noodle, often found in Hungary and Central Europe. 
It probably originates from the influence of the Ottoman empire and Turkish cuisine and the term likely comes from tarhana or of Persian origin, similar to the Persian tarkhane. The "barley" moniker is derived from its superficial resemblance to cooked pearl barley. Because of the relatively large size of the flakes, it is sometimes considered a type of small dumpling.
Tarhonya already appears in 16th-century handwritten Hungarian cookbooks. It is a simple product made of water, wheat flour, and whole eggs, that is formed into barley-sized "grains" by hand, or by cutting or grating, which makes it similar in appearance to large couscous. 
The grains, once dried and stored, can be roasted and then boiled before being used in a variety of dishes. They are served with meat or vegetable stews, egg dishes, roasted poultry, fried sausages, or in salads. In Hungary, tarhonya is fried in butter or lard before boiling.
Testaroli, sometimes referred to as testarolo, is a type of thin spongy pasta or bread in Italian cuisine that is prepared in circular sheets using water, flour and salt, which is then sliced into diamond or rectangular shapes. A common dish in the Lunigiana region and historical territory of Italy, it is an ancient pasta originating from the Etruscan civilization of Italy. Testaroli has been described as "the earliest recorded pasta." It is also a native dish of the southern Liguria and northern Tuscany regions of Italy.
Testaroli is prepared from a batter that is cooked on a hot flat surface, after which it may be consumed. It is traditionally cooked on a testo, a flat terra cotta or cast iron cooking surface from which the food's name is derived. It is sometimes cooked further in boiling water and then served. Testaroli is sometimes referred to as a bread, and is sometimes referred to as a crêpe. It may be dressed with pesto sauce or other ingredients such as olive oil, Pecorino cheese, Parmigiano-Reggiano, and garlic. Falsi testaroli al ragù is a similar dish prepared using sliced pasta dough and a ragù sauce.
Testaroli's name is based upon the testo, a terra cotta or cast iron cooking device with a hot, flat surface that testaroli is traditionally cooked on.
Testaroli is an ancient pasta that originated from the Etruscan civilization, a civilization of ancient Italy. The book Rustico: Regional Italian Country Cooking states that testaroli is "a direct descendant of the porridges of the Neolithic age that were poured over hot stones to cook." It is a native dish of the southern Liguria and northern Tuscany regions of Italy. According to an article published by The Wall Street Journal, it is "the earliest recorded pasta."In the Italian province of Massa and Carrara, located within the Tuscany region, it was a peasant food consumed as a one-course meal, topped with grated cheese and olive oil. In Massa and Carrara, it was sometimes accompanied with stracchino cheese or charcuterie. Testaroli remains a very popular dish in Pontremoli, a small city in the province of Massa and Carrara, where it is served at virtually every restaurant in the city, during both mornings and evenings. Testaroli is also a common and specialty dish in the Lunigiana region and historical territory of Italy, which is located between the Liguria and Tuscany regions.
Testaroli is a type of pancake-like pasta prepared using water, wheat flour and salt that is sliced into triangular shapes. Chestnut flour is sometimes used in its preparation. The ingredients are mixed together and prepared as a batter, after which it is cooked, sometimes using a two-stage cooking process. In the typical first stage, and sometimes only stage of cooking, the batter is poured and cooked on a hot, flat surface in the style of a pancake or crêpe. In this process, testaroli is traditionally cooked on a testo, which may be prepared for use by being heated over hot coals. A skillet is another cooking device that can be used to cook the batter. The pasta is then sliced into triangles, and is sometimes directly served after this cooking process. In the second cooking stage that is sometimes performed, the pasta may be set aside to cool, and then cooked further in boiling water.Testaroli is sometimes referred to as a type of bread that is similar to focaccia, and is also sometimes referred to as a crêpe. The book The Italian Country Table refers to testaroli as a "near cousin to pasta", and as a "great round pancake-like bread no more than a quarter inch thick." This book also states that when it is baked to a crisp texture, it can be consumed in the style of a bread, whereas when baked less, it may have a spongy and soft texture, like a pasta. Cooking methods vary in different areas of  Italy, and some of these methods are traditional in nature.
Testaroli is sometimes served with pesto sauce, which is a common addition to it in the Liguria and Tuscany regions of Italy. Another dressing method includes the addition of olive oil, Pecorino cheese, Parmigiano-Reggiano, garlic and basil. Significant amounts of sauce may absorb into testaroli.
A very similar dish is falsi testaroli al ragù , which is prepared using sliced pasta dough and does not involve the use of a batter or cooking on a testo. It is served with a ragù, an Italian meat-based sauce.
Bavette – one of the more ancient types of long pasta
Guaiti, D. . Liguria – La grande cucina regionale italiana . Edizioni Gribaudo. pp. 58–59. ISBN 978-88-580-0330-5.
"How to Make Testaroli, the Italian Pancake Pasta". Serious Eats.
Tortellini are pasta originally from the Italian region of Emilia . Traditionally they are stuffed with a mix of meat , Parmigiano Reggiano cheese, egg and nutmeg and served in capon broth .In the area of origin they are usually sold fresh or home-made. Industrially packaged, dried, refrigerated, or frozen tortellini appear in many locations around the world, especially where there are large Italian communities.
The origin of tortellini is disputed; both Bologna and Modena, cities in Italy's Emilia-Romagna region, claim to be its birthplace. The etymology of tortellini is the diminutive form of tortello, itself a diminutive of torta .The recipe for a dish called "torteletti" appears in 1570 from Bartolomeo Scappi. Vincenzo Tanara's writings in the mid-17th century may be responsible for the pasta's renaming to tortellini. In the 1800s, legends sprang up to explain the recipe's origins, offering a compromise.  Castelfranco Emilia, located between Bologna and Modena, is featured in one legend, in which Venus stays at an inn. Overcome by her beauty, the innkeeper spies on her through a keyhole, through which he can only see her navel. He is inspired to create a pasta in this shape. This legend would be at the origin of the term "ombelico di Venere" , occasionally used to describe tortellini. In honor of this legend, an annual festival is held in Castelfranco Emilia. Another legend posits that the shape comes from Modena's architecture, which resembles a turtle.
Tortelloni is pasta in a similar shape, but larger, typically 5 g, vs. 2 g for tortellini, and with the extremities closed differently. While tortellini have a meat-based filling, tortelloni are filled with ricotta and sometimes with parsley or spinach. Moreover, while tortellini are traditionally cooked in and served with broth, tortelloni are cooked in water, stir-fried  and served dry.
Hand-made tortellini  original recipe by a cooking school located in Bologna
From the rolled out egg-rich and flour pasta dough, stuffed with a mix of meat, the hand made production of tortellini  - video
Tortelli  is a type of filled pasta traditionally made in the Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna, and Tuscany regions of Italy. It can be found in several shapes, including square , semi-circular , or twisted into a rounded, hat-like form ). It can be served with melted butter, bolognese sauce, broth, or other sauces. The same word is also used to describe small, fried pastries filled with jam or cream.Ricotta tortelli, served with butter and herbs, is a popular dish in Romagna. Other typical dishes include tortelli with pumpkin  and tortelli di parma , with ricotta and herbs, spinach, potatoes, or pumpkin.
Many popular forms of tortelli can be found in Tuscany. Tortello del Melo is typical in Pistoia. Potato torricelli is popular in Arezzo, Florence, and Prato. Maremma is known for an unusually large form of tortelli with ricotta and spinach.
Torricelli, a semi-circular form of tortelli with a filling of meat and herbs , is from the Apuan Alps region , particularly Lucca, Versilia, and Garfagnana. It was originally a special meal for Shrove Tuesday, but is now prepared year-round.
Tortelloni are a stuffed pasta common in Northern Italy, with a shape similar to tortellini, but larger and with the extremities closed differently. They are traditionally stuffed with ricotta cheese and leafy herbs or vegetables such as parsley and/or spinach.Some variants replace the vegetables with other flavorful ingredients, such as porcini or walnuts. A common filling, especially in the provinces of Ferrara, Modena and Reggio Emilia, is a paste made mainly of pumpkin pulp and amaretti biscuits.When traditionally made with ricotta and herbs, they are often stir-fried with melted butter and sage leaves; however, they may also be served with ragù.As one of the few Northern Italian pasta dishes with no meat content, they are a traditional dish for Christmas Eve.
Tortiglioni are a type of pasta, similar to rigatoni but larger and with deeper grooves which spiral around the pasta.They take their name from the Latin word torquere, meaning "to twist". A tortiglione is a characteristic design from the lathe used in pasta manufacturing, with vertical ridges.
Trenette  is a type of narrow, flat, dried pasta from Genoa, Liguria; it is similar to both linguine and fettuccine. Trenette is the plural of trenetta, but is only used in the plural and is probably a diminutive of the Genoese trena 'string'. Trenette is commonly served in the form of pasta served with pesto, a dish known as trenette al pesto, which can also include potatoes and green beans boiled in the same water.
Trofie  is a short, thin, twisted pasta from Liguria, Northern Italy.
Modern trofie seems to originate from Golfo Paradiso, a strip of land in the Riviera di Levante including maritime towns like Recco, Sori, Camogli and other comuni in the area. This pasta shape was not so common in Genoa until the mid-20th century, though the term trofie was already in use there and referred to gnocchi as a whole. Genovese trofie was traditionally made with either wheat or chestnut flour and, from the beginning of the 19th century, with the addition of potatoes also.Today, trofie is a staple of modern Ligurian cuisine. It is also made in a small version called trofiette in Italy.
The origin of this pasta name is not certain. It is believed to come from the Ligurian verb strufuggiâ  as a reference to its method of preparation, which consists in "rubbing" or rolling a small piece of dough on the pastry board. Similarly, the root of Ligurian strofia might be Ancient Greek στρωφάω  or στρέφω , referring to the same motion required to produce trofie.
Trofie are shaped by rolling a small piece of dough on a flat surface to form a short, round length of pasta with tapered ends, then twisting it to form the final shape. It is around 2–3 cm  long with a diameter of roughly 4 mm . 
In Ligurian cuisine, it is most typically served with a pesto sauce.
Vermicelli  is a traditional type of pasta round in section similar to spaghetti. In English-speaking regions it is usually thinner than spaghetti, while in Italy it is typically thicker.The term vermicelli is also used to describe various types of thin noodles from Asia. In Vietnam vermicelli is the same as angel hair pasta or capellini.
As defined in Italy, the diameters of spaghetti-like pasta are:
between 2.08 and 2.30 millimetres , with little variation between different producers.
 between 0.8 and 0.9 millimetres .In the United States, the National Pasta Association  lists vermicelli as a thinner type of spaghetti.The Code of Federal Regulations of the United States of America defines spaghetti and vermicelli by diameter:
In 14th-century Italy, long pasta shapes had varying local names. Barnabas de Reatinis of Reggio notes in his Compendium de naturis et proprietatibus alimentorum  that the Tuscan vermicelli are called orati in Bologna, minutelli in Venice, fermentini in Reggio, and pancardelle in Mantua.The first mention of a vermicelli recipe is in the book De arte Coquinaria per vermicelli e maccaroni siciliani , compiled by the famous Maestro Martino da Como, unequalled in his field at the time and perhaps the first celebrity chef, who was the chef at the Roman palazzo of the papal chamberlain , the Patriarch of Aquileia. In Martino's Libro de arte coquinaria, there are several recipes for vermicelli, which can last two or three years  when dried in the sun.
Vermicelli, called shaʿīriyya  in Arabic, is used in one of the most common ways of cooking rice in Egypt and the Levant. The vermicelli is browned by frying with oil or butter, then rice and water are added.
In Somalia, it is used in a sweet dish called cadriyad, originating from the Yemeni ʿaṭriyah . The vermicelli is browned by frying with butter, then water, sugar, and cardamom are added until it has softened slightly. The dish is similar to the Indian sheer khurma; however, no milk or cream is added. Bananas can also be added on top. It is usually eaten as a dessert or as a side-dish with Somali spiced rice dishes.
Cadriyad is also a common dessert in certain parts of Ethiopia, particularly in the Arab-influenced Harar-ghe region, where it is known as attriya and is served cold, often with a thin layer of custard on top.
Possibly due to the Umayyad influence, Spain and Portugal use a type of vermicelli called aletria. It is mostly used for soups or desserts. In modern-day Portugal, aletria usually refers to a dessert similar to a rice pudding, but replacing the rice with aletria.
The fideo is a type of noodle, produced in Europe since medieval times, best known as fideus or fidelis, which spread to Mexican and Latin American cuisine, and is often referred to by speakers of English as 'vermicelli'. It is commonly used in chicken soup and in sopa seca, a type of side dish.
In countries of the Indian subcontinent, vermicelli is available either as long strands or cut into about 2-centimetre-long  pieces. Vermicelli is known by various local names such as: sewiyun in Sindhi; semya  in Telugu; sémiya when made with wheat, and sevai when made with rice in Tamil; semiya in Malayalam; shavige in Kannada; sewoi in Assamese; shemai in Bengali; seviyan in Hindi, Urdu and Punjabi; shevaya in Marathi; simei in Odia; sev in Gujarati; and semige in Tulu. The noodles are used in a number of dishes, including a variation of kheer, a sweet dessert similar to rice pudding. Vermicelli are also used in many parts of India to make a popular dish called upma. To prepare it, dry oil-roasted vermicelli and pre-sauteed vegetables such as onions, carrots, French-beans, peas, etc. are cooked together with enough water that can be absorbed by the vermicelli. Roasted cashew or peanuts are used as garnish.
In English, the Italian loanword vermicelli is used to indicate different sorts of long pasta shapes from different parts of the world, but mostly from South or East Asia.
Central Asian kesme and Persian reshteh also resemble vermicelli. Fālūde or faloodeh is a Persian frozen dessert made with thin vermicelli noodles frozen with corn starch, rose water, lime juice, and often ground pistachios.
In East and Southeast Asia, the term vermicelli is used to translate four different types of noodles. Rice vermicelli can refer to a thin dried type of rice noodle . A second type of vermicelli is made from rice that has been fermented . The latter are normally eaten fresh, rather than after drying. Thirdly, vermicelli sometimes indicates cellophane noodles made from mung bean or sweet potato flour . Cellophane noodles turn translucent after cooking, whereas rice vermicelli remain opaque. The fourth type of vermicelli are made from wheat rather than rice flour, misua .
Ziti  are a shape of extruded pasta originating from Campania and Sicily, Southern Italy. They are shaped into long, wide tubes, about 25 cm  long, that need to be broken by hand into smaller pieces before cooking. Ziti have similarities to bucatini, but are much thicker.
Ziti is the plural form of zita and zitu, respectively meaning "bride" and "groom" in Sicilian. For this reason, ziti may also be rendered as zite in Italian .In the crime-drama series The Sopranos, the phrase "box of ziti" is used as a metaphor for one thousand dollars. This term has spread to become colloquial in New York. The term was used in Albany by Andrew Cuomo during the sentencing of a bribery scheme by Joseph Pereco in February, 2018.
Ziti strands are made of long and wide tubes, each being around 25 cm . Ziti has similarities to bucatini, rigatoni and penne. Ziti are created from durum wheat flour and water.They are also used to make pasta alla Norma.In Sicily, they are traditionally served at a wedding feast.There’s also zitoni, or zitone, which are thicker a cut than ziti, being inbetween ziti and rigatoni.
Baked ziti is a casserole with ziti pasta and a Neapolitan-style tomato sauce. It is characteristic of Italian-American cuisine. It is a form of pasta al forno.
Typically, the pasta is first boiled separately until it is nearly, but not completely, done. The almost-cooked pasta is added to a tomato-based sauce. The tomato-coated pasta is then combined with cheese, typically a mixture of ricotta, mozzarella, and Parmesan. Other ingredients can be added with the cheese, such as ground meat, sausage, mushrooms, peppers, and onions. The combined ingredients are placed in a baking dish, covered with mozzarella cheese, baked in the oven and served hot. If unavailable, ziti can be substituted with other tubular pastas such as penne or rigatoni.
Five Nights at Freddy's  is a video game series and media franchise created by Scott Cawthon. The first video game was released on August 8, 2014, and the resultant series has since gained worldwide popularity.
The main series consists of nine video games taking place in locations connected to a fictional family pizza restaurant franchise named "Freddy Fazbear's Pizza", after its mascot, the animatronic bear Freddy Fazbear. In most games, the player assumes the role of a night-time employee, who must utilize tools such as security cameras, lights, doors, and vents to defend themselves against animatronic characters who inhabit the locations and become mobile and hostile at night. The series' lore is gradually revealed through voice recordings, minigames, and Easter eggs featured throughout the games.
The franchise also includes spin-off games and other media, such as a feature film adaptation, novel trilogy, and an anthology series, comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe. The franchise maintains an active fanbase, known for its production of fan art and fan games, and merchandise for the games is available internationally. As of 2023, the series has sold over 33.5 million units worldwide.
The idea for Five Nights at Freddy's stemmed from the negative reception of Scott Cawthon's previous game, the family-friendly Chipper & Sons Lumber Co. Players said that the main character  looked like "a scary animatronic animal", and reviewer Jim Sterling called the game "unintentionally terrifying". Initially discouraged by the criticism, Cawthon  eventually used the feedback to make something intentionally scarier.Five Nights at Freddy's was released via Desura on August 8, 2014. On August 20, after it was approved by the service's crowdsourcing platform Greenlight, Five Nights at Freddy's was also released on Steam. When the game was picked up by well-known YouTubers it became an internet sensation.: 82 The sequels were released on November 10, 2014, March 2, 2015, July 23, 2015, October 7, 2016, December 4, 2017, June 27, 2018, May 28, 2019, November 25, 2019, and December 16, 2021, respectively. A spin-off from the series, FNaF World, was announced in a Steam post by Cawthon in September 2015, and was released in January 2016. Cawthon releases teasers for his games on his website, and trailers on his YouTube channel.
Cawthon used Clickteam Fusion 2.5 to create the Five Nights at Freddy's games and Autodesk 3ds Max to model and render the games' 3D graphics. To enhance Sister Location, Pizzeria Simulator, Ultimate Custom Night, Help Wanted, and Special Delivery, Cawthon used professional voice actors and original soundtracks. In May 2016, he announced that all titles would be remade by third-party companies for release on consoles.Cawthon posted on his website in 2015 that he planned to publish his first novel  in the near future, with its stories separate from that of the games. Cawthon also announced that it would be co-written by author Kira Breed-Wrisley. On June 20, 2016, Scholastic announced that it would collaborate with Cawthon on a multi-book deal. The Silver Eyes was released on December 17, 2015, on Amazon Kindle, and the paperback version was published on September 27, 2016, slightly earlier than its originally planned October publication date. A second novel, The Twisted Ones, was published on June 27, 2017, followed by The Fourth Closet on June 26, 2018.
The Five Nights at Freddy's series consists of horror-themed video games in which the player is usually a night-time employee at a location connected with Freddy Fazbear's Pizza, a fictional children's restaurant that takes inspiration from family pizza chains like Chuck E. Cheese and ShowBiz Pizza Place. The restaurant has life-size animatronic characters resembling anthropomorphic animals that perform on a show stage, usually for children's parties. The animatronics wander the restaurant at night, and the guard is instructed to watch over them. To progress through the games, the player must guard themselves against animatronics with a variety of tools. The original stated explanation for the animatronics' mobility is to prevent their servomotors from locking up due to lack of use, and their homicidal behaviors are caused by their mistaking humans for animatronic endoskeletons, whom they will force inside character suits, killing them in the process. From the third game forward, however, it is retroactively established that the animatronics are actually possessed by spirits of children murdered by restaurant cofounder and overarching franchise antagonist William Afton, who stuffed the bodies inside the animatronics, then accidentally killed himself when he disguised himself in an animatronic suit and activated its spring-locks. This backstory is hinted at during the exposition of the first game, where a hidden news article explains that the restaurant's reputation was damaged when blood, mucus, and foul odors began to leak from the animatronics' eyes and mouths.
In Five Nights at Freddy's, the player can control the two security doors connecting their office to the adjacent hallways as a barrier against animatronics in the vicinity. Each night, the player has a power supply that depletes faster when a tool is used. If the power goes out, the player can no longer use any tools and is defenseless against the animatronics unless a shift ends before main animatronic Freddy Fazbear can attack. Five Nights at Freddy's 2 has different tools; there are no protective doors, and the player must instead use an empty animatronic head and flashlight to defend themself against the animatronics. The game introduced a music box which must be remotely wound up on a regular basis to prevent an attack from a particular animatronic. Eight-bit mini-games were introduced, which are played randomly after death and give cryptic clues into the lore.Five Nights at Freddy's 3 uses a monitor panel, which contains audio, camera, and ventilation. The player must keep certain systems from malfunctioning. These malfunctions can be triggered randomly or by the hallucinations of the animatronics from the first and second games. The ability to seal vents is also added and must be used to prevent the sole tangible animatronic from entering the office. The player can use an audio-based function on the cameras, which triggers a childlike voice to lure Springtrap, the game's only physical animatronic possessed by William Afton's spirit, away from the office. The 8-bit minigames return and are playable after each night if the player completes side tasks such as clicking on a poster or inputting a code into a wall. If the player completes the minigames, they unlock a secret ending.In Five Nights at Freddy's 4, the gameplay occurs in a bedroom setting, and instead of being a nighttime security guard, the player takes the role of a small child who experiences nightmarish visions of the animatronics due to fearing their real-life counterparts. The player also no longer has access to a camera system. The player has four areas in the bedroom to monitor: two hallway doors on both sides of the room, the closet directly in front of them, and the bed behind them. At the doors, the player must listen for animatronics' breathing, which can determine whether they are near.If the player hears breathing at the side doors, they close the door and wait for the animatronics to walk away. If they open the doors too early, however, the animatronics jump scare the player. The player must also prevent small animatronics from accumulating on their bed, and prevent an animatronic from entering their closet. Five Nights at Freddy's 4 also introduces a minigame involving a new animatronic, which offers the player a two-hour skip in the next night for completing the minigame.An elevated control pad is introduced for Sister Location, which can light a room or shock the animatronics. Other mechanics include a second control pad in a breaker room, which controls power to the facility and a flash beacon, which allows the player to see in the dark Funtime Auditorium  and avoid its animatronic. Sister Location is the only game where the player can move between rooms. Pizzeria Simulator has business-style gameplay, and the player must spend in-game money to buy features for their pizzeria. A series of minigames can be played by testing the establishment's attractions. After the player has completed this portion of the game, they complete tasks in a room and fend off hostile, previously salvaged animatronics.The gameplay of Pizzeria Simulator shares a number of elements with Five Nights at Freddy's 3, including the importance of ventilation and the ability to distract animatronics with sound. Ultimate Custom Night is a customizable night, in which fifty animatronics are present and have a maximum AI level of twenty. The game includes many mechanics from the previous games, such as the heater, fan, music box, and power generator. The player can choose which characters they want active for a night, and how active the characters will be.
Help Wanted combines the gameplay of every other game, and turns into a virtual experience for the player. It also introduces several other minigames, in which the gameplay is variant, and also at times has free-roam. Special Delivery features location-based augmented reality gameplay. The player can switch on their camera, and the footage itself is the game's background. The animatronics will try to attack corresponding to the environment. The animatronics generally have cloaking, which leads them to being invisible.Security Breach holds the open-world aspect to this title allows players to experience a new level of immersion. Similar to that of Five Night's at Freddy's 4. Players will also have access to a nifty tool called the Faz-Watch, which allows them to view maps, read messages picked up from random areas on the map, check security cameras for nearby danger, and look at their current objectives. It incorporates the use of Freddy being your helpful companion although he has to be charged at stations through the map. You can distract animatronics by knocking things over to get their attention, while you can crouch and hide in box structures to evade them as they follow you throughout the map. Unlike other Five Nights games there are limited save points and you can no longer save after you have finished a night.
In the first, second, third, seventh, eighth,A and ninthB games, the player has a security-camera system, which observes the animatronic characters. One location can be viewed at a time, and some areas are not visible on the cameras. Most camera feeds are dull, sometimes almost black and white in color, and full of video noise. In the third game, the cameras stop working if their associated system fails. Cameras are used in the fifth game as a mechanic in the fake ending and custom night update, but not in the main game.
In all games except for the third, lights are used to ward off animatronics or warn the player. Lights in the first, second, fifth, and eighthA games are activated with buttons on the walls and illuminate the player's blind spots: the doorway or vent exit, respectively. The lights are similar in the fifth game, but are mounted on a control pad and illuminate the animatronics' rooms. The fifth game also introduced a flash beacon, which is used to orient the player in the third and fifth nights' pitch-black rooms.Several games include use of a flashlight. In the second game, the flashlight has a finite battery life and cannot be recharged, while in the fourth and seventh games, the battery life is infinite. In the eighthA game, the flashlight battery varies depending on the game segment being played. Flashlight battery life is again finite in the ninthB game, but can be recharged at various recharge stations throughout the game.
In the first, fourth, seventh, eighth,A and ninth games, doors are a means of defense for the player, and can be closed when an animatronic is near. Vents are featured in the second, third, sixth, and eighthA games, as a medium through which animatronics can get to the player. Both doors and vents are again present in the fake ending and custom night update of the fifth game with the same function. Vents are also present in the fifth and ninthB games as means for the player to travel through, rather than the animatronics.
Every game in the main series contains jump scares, which end a game in defeat as the animatronics are implied to attack the player off-screen. In most jump scares, an animatronic character suddenly appears in the player's view, followed by a loud screaming or roaring noise. Some jump scares, including those by Golden Freddy , Nightmare, and Nightmarionette , consist of a single screen with shrill, distorted audio; these jump scares usually crash  the game. The player must use various tools to prevent being attacked via jump scares and advance through each game.
In the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, eighth,A and ninthB games, the player gains access to a series of  minigames randomly after death, or after completing a specific task. The minigames usually relate to a story or event relevant to the game, in a cryptic manner. The minigames in the second game portray homicides mentioned by another worker of the restaurant, and the reason of the animatronics gaining life. The minigames in the third game show the story behind Springtrap's creation. Minigames in the fourth game tell the story of a character who dies in a tragic accident.There is only one minigame in the fifth game, which depicts the death of animatronic engineer William Afton's daughter. The minigames in the sixth game depict various events in the series, all connected to Afton. In the mobile version of the eighthA game, the player can access a minigame called "Princess Quest", which depicts the origins of a character called Vanny; a recreation of these minigames is also featured in the ninthB game, with some significant additions.
Freddy Fazbear  – A brown bear with a black top hat and bowtie, and the mascot character of Freddy Fazbear's Pizza, debuting as the lead singer of the animatronics' show stage band. With a few exceptions, most variations of Freddy serve as main or supporting antagonists. Cawthon's initial name for the character was Freddybear, a play on "teddy bear".
Golden Freddy is a ghostly, yellow version of Freddy who appears under special circumstances in the first two games and can cause them to crash.
Toy Freddy  is the successor to Freddy Fazbear, featuring a revamped design and advanced face-recognition software. Alongside the other Toy animatronics, he was created for the second Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant, featured in the second game.
Fredbear  is the original version of Freddy with a dark yellow and purple color scheme and the mascot for Fredbear's Family Diner, the precursor to Freddy Fazbear's Pizza.
Funtime Freddy  is the Funtime counterpart of Freddy with a white and pink color scheme. Like the other Funtime animatronics, he is rented out to birthday parties and was built by William Afton with the secret goal of luring and capturing children.
Glamrock Freddy  is the Glamrock counterpart of Freddy debuting in Security Breach. Unlike the other animatronics, he helps Gregory.
Bonnie – An indigo rabbit with a red bowtie, debuting as a guitar player in the show stage band.
Toy Bonnie is Bonnie's successor who features a light blue color scheme and face-recognition software and was created for the second Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant.
Spring Bonnie is Bonnie's original version from Fredbear's Family Diner with a color scheme like Fredbear's, named after the springlocks built within the suit. The Spring Bonnie suit was notably used by William Afton during his murder spree, and later becomes Springtrap after being possessed by Afton's spirit.
Bon-Bon  is Bonnie's Funtime counterpart who is puppet-sized and attached to Funtime Freddy's right arm, though he can be detached at will.
Glamrock Bonnie is Bonnie's Glamrock counterpart that was destroyed by Monty.
Chica – A yellow chicken with a white bib that reads "Let's eat!", debuting as a backup singer in the show stage band. Most Chica variations are seen paired with a respective variation of the Mr. Cupcake animatronic, resembling a cupcake with pink frosting, eyes, buck teeth, and a birthday candle; although Cupcakes also appear independently of their Chica counterparts and are generally harmless.
Toy Chica  is Chica's successor who features a revamped design, a removable beak and face-recognition software, and was created for the second Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant.
Funtime Chica  is Chica's Funtime countepart with a white and pink color scheme. She was not introduced in Sister Location like the other Funtime animatronics, instead debuting in Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator.
Glamrock Chica  is Chica's Glamrock counterpart, debuting in Security Breach.
Foxy  – A red pirate fox with an eye patch and a hook for one hand, and the only member of the series' four main animatronics who does not debut as a band member.
Mangle  is Foxy's successor who features a white and pink color scheme and was created for the second Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant. It is named after its ability to be taken apart and put back together in a number of unusual ways.
Funtime Foxy  is Foxy's Funtime counterpart with a white and pink color scheme and a red bowtie. Created by William Afton with the secret goal of luring and capturing children, he is rented out to birthday parties.
The Puppet  – A marionette and the main antagonist of the second game, who becomes a supporting antagonist and later a hero character in subsequent games.
Balloon Boy / "BB" – A humanoid resembling a small boy with a red and blue striped t-shirt and propeller hat. In the 2023 film, he is depicted as a small toy instead of an animatronic.
Circus Baby  – A large humanoid resembling a small girl and the leader of the Funtime animatronics, who serves as the main antagonist of Sister Location and a supporting antagonist in subsequent games.
Scrap Baby is a decrepit version of Circus Baby, built from scraps after being forcibly ejected out of Ennard.
Ballora  – A humanoid ballerina and member of the Funtime animatronics, created by William Afton with the secret goal of luring and capturing children.
Ennard  – A fusion of most of the Funtime animatronics, primarily operated by Circus Baby, that briefly inserts itself into Michael Afton's hollowed body before being regurgitated. He serves as the overarching antagonist of Sister Location.
Molten Freddy  is the regurgitated remains of Ennard, with the consciousness of Funtime Freddy in control after ejecting Circus Baby. He was introduced as one of the antagonists of Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator.
The Blob / Tangle - A mass of wires and animatronic part, who is debuted as a minor antagonist in one of the endings of Security Breach, and is briefly seen in the Ruin DLC.
Roxanne "Roxy" Wolf  – An animatronic wolf debuts in Security Breach as a hostile animatronic and later appears as a supporting character in Ruin.
Montgomery "Monty" Gator  is an alligator animatronic introduced in Security Breach who is revealed to have killed and taken the place of Glamrock Bonnie.
The Mimic – An endoskeleton and the main antagonist of the Tales of the Pizzaplex book series and the Ruin DLC for Security Breach.
Ella – Charlotte Emily's baby doll during her childhood in the novel series. In the 2023 film, she is depicted as a springlock suit.
Mike Schmidt – The nighttime security guard and player character in the first game. A different version of the character is portrayed by Josh Hutcherson in the 2023 film, in which he is depicted as the guardian to his younger sister Abby following their parents' deaths, who uses dream therapy to try and remember the face of the man who kidnapped his younger brother Garrett in his youth.
The "Phone Guy"  – A previous security guard heard in the first three games, who leaves recorded phone messages that provide exposition about the games and their lore. In the first game, he guides Mike Schmidt to survive at Freddy's, until he is murdered by the animatronics. In the second game, which serves as a prequel, he similarly guides Jeremy Fitzgerald to survive at his job, until Jeremy is promoted to the day shift at the end of the game. In the third game, the Phone Guy makes a posthumous appearance in the form of tapes he left behind, which are used by the "Phone Dude" , an employee of the Fazbear's Fright horror-themed attraction, to guide newly-hired security guards.
Jeremy Fitzgerald – The first security guard and player character from the second game. After completing the sixth night, he is promoted to the day shift, where he is told to stay near the animatronics. He is speculated to be the victim of the "Bite of '87", an incident referenced in several games of the series.
Fritz Smith – The second security guard and player character from the second game, who is controlled during the Custom Night. He is fired after tampering with the animatronics, shortly before the restaurant is closed.
William Afton  – The franchise's main antagonist, he is a robotics engineer, the co-founder and owner of Fazbear Entertainment, and a sadistic serial killer responsible for most of the tragedies and incidents throughout the series, including the murders of several children whose souls possess the animatronics, bringing them to life. Afton has not appeared physically in any game so far, but appears in the minigames of the second and third games as a purple silhouette, earning him the popular nickname "Purple Guy" until his real name was confirmed in Sister Location. A different version of the character is portrayed by Matthew Lillard in the 2023 film.
Springtrap is the decrepit Spring Bonnie animatronic suit animated by Afton's spirit after he died inside the suit when its springlocks were accidentally triggered. It debuted as the main antagonist of the third game.
Scraptrap is a modified, yet slightly more damaged version of Spring Bonnie which Afton wears in Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator.
Glitchtrap is a virus debuting in Help Wanted, which resembles Spring Bonnie and originated from an old circuit board, likely built by Afton. It haunts the Freddy Fazbear Virtual Experience, where it attempts to brainwash players and take control of their bodies to escape into the real world.
Burntrap is a heavily damaged and charred version of Spring Bonnie which contains Afton's undead body following his resurrection in Security Breach. However, the events of the game's Ruin DLC makes the canonitity of Burntrap unclear.
The "Missing Children" – William Afton's most notable murder victims, whom he lured into the safe room at Freddy Fazbear's Pizza while disguised as Spring Bonnie. Their bodies were stuffed inside the animatronics featured in the first game, although evidence of the bodies' decay severely damaged Fazbear Entertainment's reputation. Their souls now possess and animate the animatronics. The victims are named Gabriel , Jeremy , Susie , Fritz , and Cassidy . In the 2023 film, they are played by Liam Hendrix, David Houston Doty, Jophielle Love, Asher Colton Spence, and Grant Feely.
The "Crying Child" – A young boy and the player character of the fourth game's minigames with a paralyzing fear of animatronics spurred on by his older brother's bullying. He presumably dies after his brother and his friends shove his head into the Fredbear animatronic’s mouth, which forcibly closes and crushes his head. He is speculated to be the son of William Afton, the brother of Michael and Elizabeth Afton, and one of the spirits haunting Golden Freddy.
Michael Afton  – An animatronic technician/restaurant manager and the player character of Sister Location and Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator, who is the son of William Afton and the brother of Elizabeth Afton. A young Michael is speculated to be the player character during the main levels of the fourth game. In Sister Location, Michael seeks to free his sister from Circus Baby, but ends up being "scooped" by her, with his body subsequently being used to hold Ennard. After Ennard leaves his body, Michael is resurrected, albeit as a rotting undead corpse. In Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator, Michael becomes the manager of a new Freddy Fazbear's restaurant owned by Henry Emily, whom he helps end William's murderous legacy by luring all the haunted animatronics to the restaurant before it is burned down by Henry. Michael opts to remain in the restaurant as it is destroyed and presumably dies.
Elizabeth Afton  – William Afton's daughter and Michael Afton's younger sister, whose soul possesses Circus Baby after she was killed by the animatronic, merging with its artificial intelligence system to become Circus Baby herself. In Sister Location, she merges with the other Funtime animatronics to become Ennard and tricks Michael into getting "scooped", to allow Ennard to use his body as a puppet and escape the facility it is being held in, before eventually abandoning it. In Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator, Circus Baby rebuilds itself as Scrap Baby after being ejected from Ennard, and is lured to the new Freddy Fazbear's restaurant run by Michael and Henry Emily, where the animatronic is ultimately destroyed when the restaurant is burned down, presumably releasing Elizabeth's spirit.
Henry Emily  – William Afton's one-time business partner, with whom he co-founded Fazbear Entertainment, and the overarching protagonist of Freddy Fazbear's Pizza Simulator.
Charlotte "Charlie" Emily – Henry Emily's daughter and William Afton's first victim, whose soul possesses the Puppet animatronic. A different version of the character appears as the protagonist of the book trilogy.
Gregory  – The child protagonist of Security Breach who becomes trapped inside Freddy Fazbear's Mega Pizzaplex over night and attempts to escape with help from Glamrock Freddy.
Vanessa A. / "Vanny"  – A young security guard, the protagonist of Help Wanted and secondary antagonist of Security Breach, who is corrupted into becoming a follower of Glitchtrap. She subsequently becomes a serial killer wearing a white rabbit costume to continue William Afton's legacy, while also secretly plotting to resurrect him. A different version of the character named Vanessa Shelly is portrayed by Elizabeth Lail in the 2023 film, where she is depicted as a police officer and Afton's daughter who has been covering up his crimes until ultimately turning on him.
Cassie  – The child protagonist of the Ruin DLC for Security Breach who is a friend of Gregory's and tries to find him in the Pizzaplex.
Abby Schmidt  – Mike's sister in the 2023 film, who the animatronics want to convert into one of them.
Garrett Schmidt  – Mike's younger brother in the 2023 film, who was abducted and killed by Afton.
Five Nights at Freddy's was released for Microsoft Windows on August 8, 2014, followed by ports for Android and iOS on August 27 and September 11, respectively. A Windows Phone version was also released, but was soon withdrawn due to its downscaled graphics. Ports for the PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch were released on November 29, 2019, alongside separate releases for Five Nights at Freddy's 2, 3 and 4.The first game revolves around a character called Mike Schmidt, who begins working as a night security guard at Freddy Fazbear's Pizza, where the animatronics move at night and supposedly kill anyone they see by stuffing them into a spare animatronic suit. Animatronic movement is explained to the player as a purposely programmed "free-roaming" mode, to prevent the animatronic's servomotors from locking up. The player must survive from 12 a.m. to 6 a.m.They cannot leave the room and must use a camera system and two doors with lights to defend themselves from the animatronics, with limited power to use their tools. The hostility of the animatronics appears to result from the possession by the vengeful souls of children who were killed at the restaurant. The player is guided by the previous night guard, known as Phone Guy, who assists them in their defense against the animatronics. Mike is fired from his job after the seventh night for "tampering with the animatronics, body odor and general unprofessionalism".
Shortly after the release of the first game, Cawthon confirmed rumors about a sequel. He posted a teaser of the sequel on his website one month after the original game's release and continued to post teasers until the sequel's release. A trailer was released on October 21, 2014, introducing new animatronic characters and the absence of doors. Five Nights at Freddy's 2 was released for Microsoft Windows on November 10, 2014, earlier than its planned release of December 25. Ports for Android and iOS were released on November 13 and 20 of 2014, respectively. A Windows Phone port was also released, but was withdrawn for substandard graphics. PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch console ports were released on November 29, 2019.The gameplay is largely similar to its predecessor. Players must survive a night shift at the "new and improved" Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant from 12 a.m. to 6 a.m., without being attacked by any of the animatronics that wander from room to room. In addition to the animatronics from the first game, which are depicted in a deteriorated state, the game features several new antagonists, who can be fended off using different tactics. The explanation given for the animatronics' behavior during the game is similar to the one from the first Five Nights at Freddy's. The protagonist is a new character, Jeremy Fitzgerald, who is promoted to daytime security after the sixth night, being replaced by Fritz Smith in the "custom night". 
During the game, Phone Guy from the previous game calls Jeremy to give him hints on how to survive each night while talking about the restaurant's history. During these calls, it is revealed that the restaurant has become the subject of a police investigation due to various rumors. It is also possible to access hidden Atari-styled minigames that provide further insight on the restaurant's troubled past, showing a purple figure killing multiple children. On the fifth night, the location is put on lockdown due to an unspecified event. At the end of the game, Jeremy receives a paycheck dated 1987, revealing that the events of the game take place before the first Five Nights at Freddy's, and the restaurant is closed, with a new location set to be opened elsewhere.
On January 3, 2015, an image was uploaded to Cawthon's website teasing a third entry in the series. Other images followed before a trailer was released on January 26, 2015. On February 15, Cawthon posted on Steam that Five Nights at Freddy's 3 was cancelled after a hacker allegedly leaked the game. This was later revealed as a hoax; the "leaked" download linked to a humorous clone of a previous game of Cawthon's, There is No Pause Button!, in which the main character is depicted wearing the Freddy animatronic head. Five Nights at Freddy's 3 was released for Microsoft Windows on March 3, 2015, with Android and iOS ports following on March 7 and 12, respectively. PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch console ports were released on November 29, 2019.Set thirty years after the events of the first game, its main character works at Fazbear's Fright, a horror attraction based on the long-gone Freddy Fazbear's Pizza. The player must defend themselves from the deteriorated animatronic-costume hybrid named Springtrap. Burnt and tattered hallucinations of some of the animatronics from the previous two games appear; and although they cannot kill the player, they can hinder ventilation, sound, and camera systems. Failure to maintain the systems can create many issues for the player, including dysfunctional cameras and the inability to play audio to lure away the animatronic.The player receives guidance from a founder of the horror attraction for the first two nights and listens to old tape recordings which were found by the attraction's workers for the rest of the nights. The game has two endings: a "good" ending and a "bad" ending. The bad ending reveals that the souls of the murdered children still haunt the animatronics. The good ending is reached by completing secret minigames in which animatronic characters bring a cake to what seems to be a sorrowful child's soul. After completing the secret minigames, the souls of the children are freed.
On April 27, 2015, Cawthon began posting images on his website teasing another game in the series, which was originally titled Five Nights at Freddy's: The Final Chapter. A trailer was released on July 13, 2015, hinting that the game was set in the main character's house. Five Nights at Freddy's 4 was announced with a release date of October 31, 2015. It was pushed forward to August 8 and again to July 23, when the game was unexpectedly released on Microsoft Windows through Steam. Android and iOS ports were released on July 25 and August 3, 2015, respectively. PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch console ports were released on November 29, 2019.The player character is an unknown and unnamed character who has delusions of being attacked by nightmarish versions of the first game's animatronic characters. The player must defend themselves with a flashlight and doors. The game's story is told through minigames, in which an unnamed young boy is bullied because of his irrational fear of a restaurant with a yellow animatronic bear and rabbit called Fredbear and Spring Bonnie, respectively. He is guided by a plush version of Fredbear, whom the boy imagines can speak to him when he is alone. The child appears to be ultimately killed by Fredbear in a freak accident. The game had a Halloween update with "nightmare" versions of animatronics from Five Nights at Freddy's 2 and Halloween-themed reskins for Nightmare Bonnie and Nightmare Chica.
On April 23, 2016, Cawthon posted a teaser image on his website of a clown-like animatronic named Baby from an upcoming game titled Sister Location. Several teaser images of different characters and hints at their origins followed. The trailer for the game was released on Cawthon's YouTube channel, with new animatronics and a new location. The release date was announced as October 7, 2016. Cawthon made a prank release of the game on October 5, apparently releasing a "mature" edition after a decision to delay the game to make it more kid-friendly. The download link led to a clone of Cawthon's previous game, Sit 'N Survive.Sister Location was released for Microsoft Windows on October 7, 2016, followed by ports for Android on December 22, 2016, and iOS on January 3, 2017, respectively. It was also released on Nintendo Switch in North America on June 18, 2020, and on Xbox One on July 10, 2020. The PlayStation 4 port was released in Europe and North America on July 21 and July 22, 2020, respectively.
The player character Michael Afton, nicknamed Mike , is a new employee of Circus Baby's Rentals and Entertainment . The animatronics were originally intended for Circus Baby's Pizza World, which never opened due to a gas leak. Mike is guided by HandUnit, an AI character similar to the Phone Guy of previous games. HandUnit instructs him about his job, often telling him to disregard safety; the animatronic Baby often gives instructions that contradicts that of HandUnit, but are vital to survival.
The game also has a "custom night", in which the player can use mechanics reminiscent of the first game  which were absent from the main game, except for a non-canonical ending, titled the "Fake Ending". New minigames are also available, describing Michael's fate after the events of the main game. A cutscene is shown after the "Golden Freddy" custom-night preset, in which Michael speaks to his father, William Afton/Springtrap, in a foreboding way.
In June 2017, Cawthon hinted at the development of a sixth main game in the series. On July 2, 2017, he announced his decision to cancel the game and said that he had been "neglecting other things in  life for the sake of trying to keep up with mounting expectations". On December 4, 2017, after teasing the game several days earlier, Cawthon released Freddy Fazbear's Pizzeria Simulator as freeware on Steam. The game is a business-simulation game in which the player runs a pizzeria, but frequently shifts into the survival-horror vein of the series' other games.
The game's story again follows Michael Afton who, sometime following the events of Five Nights at Freddy's 3 and Sister Location, becomes the manager of a new Freddy Fazbear's restaurant run by the mysterious "Cassette Man". Every night, Michael, under Cassette Man's guidance, must salvage one of four decrepit animatronics that were found in the restaurant's back alley, including his father William / Springtrap  and his sister Elizabeth / Circus Baby . 
The game has multiple endings depending on how well the player runs the pizzeria and whether they salvaged all the animatronics, but the canon ending has Cassette Man reveal himself as Henry Emily, William's former business partner and the father of Charlotte , and set the restaurant on fire after revealing its true purpose as a trap to lure in the remaining animatronics. The restaurant burns to the ground, seemingly killing Michael, Henry, and all the animatronics, finally releasing the spirits haunting them.
Ultimate Custom Night was originally intended to be a post-launch add-on to Pizzeria Simulator, but was eventually turned into a stand-alone game, releasing on June 27, 2018. The customizable night contains a total of fifty animatronics from previous games, which allows the player to determine how aggressive they are during the night . The player can select the office to play in and has 16 themed game modes available. Although unconfirmed, it has been heavily speculated that the game takes place in some version of Hell or Purgatory, where William Afton, following his death in Pizzeria Simulator, is being continuously tortured by the vengeful spirit of one of his victims.
However, the anthology novel series Fazbear Frights implies that the game is actually Afton's repeating nightmare, and not hell or purgatory. This comes from the fifth book, Bunny Call, which has a story called "The Man in Room 1280" where a burned man is kept alive by a shadow child despite the fact that he should be dead and suffers nightmares. In the following book, Blackbird, the epilogue confirms that the man is actually William Afton. Although it was never confirmed if the Fazbear Frights series is canon or not, Cawthon confirmed that it's supposed to reveal mysteries from the previous games.
On August 18, 2018, Cawthon confirmed on his Steam thread that the next main installment in the Five Nights at Freddy's series would be available as a virtual reality game. On March 25, 2019, during Sony Interactive Entertainment's State of Play live stream announcing several new games for the PlayStation 4, a trailer announcing the game was shown. In the game, the player is a technician repairing a pizzeria's animatronics. From a first-person perspective, they fix the animatronics, solve puzzles and navigate dark hallways while avoiding malfunctioning and hostile animatronics. The game was released on May 28, 2019. A non-VR version of the game was released on December 17, 2019, for Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 4.
Curse of Dreadbear, a Halloween-themed downloadable content pack for Help Wanted was released in three parts, with several "waves" of new minigames released on October 23, October 29, and October 31, 2019, for a total of 10 new minigames. The DLC pack includes new animatronic characters, returning animatronics from previous games, and a Halloween-themed hub. Some of the new stages are re-skinned versions of existent minigames, such as a version of the FNAF 1 minigames called Danger! Keep Out! Notable new game modes include a shooting gallery, a free-roaming corn maze, and an assembly line in which the player must construct an animatronic.
On August 8, 2019, on the first game's fifth anniversary, Cawthon posted a new image on his website, teasing the next installment for the series. It shows the "Mega Pizzaplex", a large shopping mall containing a laser tag arena, an arcade, a cinema and a Freddy Fazbear's Pizza restaurant; in the main square, '80s-style versions of Freddy, Chica, and four completely new animatronics can be seen playing for an excited crowd. On April 21, 2020, the characters' names were leaked from Funko's list of upcoming products, and the title was revealed as Five Nights at Freddy's: Pizza Plex. Scott Cawthon confirmed the leaks via Reddit but revealed that the title was not official. The game was initially scheduled for an early 2021 release, but was delayed to late 2021.Security Breach was released on PlayStation 5, PlayStation 4 and Steam on December 16, 2021. The game's plot revolves around a young boy named Gregory being trapped in a large shopping mall teeming with murderous animatronics who hunt him down by the orders of Vanny, a mysterious woman in a rabbit costume, while also evading the mall's security guard, Vanessa. Suffering a malfunction that causes him to ignore Vanny's hacking, Freddy assists Gregory in escaping the mall.
On May 24, 2023, during a PlayStation Showcase, Steel Wool Studios announced a direct sequel to Help Wanted titled Help Wanted 2, scheduled for release in December 2023.
Cawthon announced a spin-off from his series, FNaF World, on September 15, 2015. Unlike the main series, the game is a role-playing video game using the first four games' animatronic characters. The game is set in a fanciful world where the characters must fight enemies and progress by unlocking perks and items. Originally planned for release on February 2, 2016, Cawthon rescheduled the release for January 22 and released it on January 1.Players and critics criticized the game for missing key features and being unstable and unfinished, for which Cawthon apologized: "I got too eager to show the things that were finished that I neglected to pay attention to the things that weren't." He decided to remove it from Steam, saying that the game would be improved and later re-released free of charge. Cawthon announced that he asked Valve to refund all purchasers the price of the game.
He released a free version of the game, featuring a 3D overworld and an updated character-selection screen, in February 2016. Cawthon posted a new teaser the following month, with characters such as the main series' Purple Guy and most of the characters from the Halloween update of Five Nights at Freddy's 4. He created minigames for the game's second update, including Foxy Fighters, FOXY.exe, Chica's Magic Rainbow, and FNaF 57: Freddy In Space.
An augmented reality game, Five Nights at Freddy's: Special Delivery, was announced on September 13, 2019. The game was released for free on iOS and Android on November 25, 2019.
Dark Circus: Encore!, downloadable content for Special Delivery, was released on December 13, 2021.
Freddy in Space 2 is a side-scrolling platform shooter game and a sequel to the FNaF 57: Freddy in Space minigame from FNaF World. It was released for free on December 3, 2019, on Game Jolt. The game was made to promote a "#CancelCancer" charity livestream on YouTube, which was hosted by Matthew Patrick of Game Theory for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tennessee.
Security Breach: Fury's Rage is a side-scrolling beat 'em up game featuring the main cast of Security Breach. It was released for free on April 28, 2021, on Game Jolt. The game was made to compensate for Security Breach being delayed for a second time.
Freddy in Space 3: Chica in Space is a side-scrolling platform shooter game and a sequel to Freddy in Space 2, it was released on October 18, 2023 under the title FNAF: The Movie: The Game, which was developed by Cawthon, claimed to be a spoiler-heavy tie-in game of the Five Nights at Freddy's movie, which was revealed to be Freddy in Space 3 in disguise. It was released for free on Game Jolt.
On August 21, 2020, Cawthon announced his plan to help fund and publish Five Nights at Freddy's games developed by fans, bundled with previous installments in their respective series. He will not be involved in any of the creative elements but will help with marketing and publishing support, as well as appropriate licensing. The games included will be the One Night at Flumpty's series, the Five Nights at Candy's series, The Joy of Creation: Ignited Collection , and POPGOES Evergreen . Cawthon stated that these games will come to mobile and consoles, and may even have merchandise created for them. The first game to be released under this initiative was a port of One Night at Flumpty's for Android and iOS on October 31 and November 18, 2020, respectively. The second game to be released was a port of its sequel One Night at Flumpty's 2 on January 20, 2021, again for Android and iOS.The first new game to be released as a part of this initiative was One Night at Flumpty's 3 on October 31, 2021, for PC and mobile devices. A version for consoles was planned but was quietly shelved following the creator Jonochrome being accused and later admitting to having a relationship with a then minor for 5 years. It is currently unknown if the collection will release.
During August 2023, the creator of Five Nights at Freddy's Plus, a remake/re-imagining of the original game, Phil Morg , was pulled from the team and had his contract revoked due to his sarcastic apologies regarding a fan receiving death threats and videos containing gore after making a joke about his reaction to the Five Nights at Freddy's: Security Breach DLC Ruin. The game would end up being removed from the Steam store days later, leaving the game's future uncertain.
